Accurate traffic prediction is a critical yet challenging task in Intelligent Transportation Systems, benefiting a variety of smart services, e.g., route planning and traffic management. Although extensive efforts have been devoted to this problem, it is still not well solved due to the flexible dependency within traffic data along both spatial and temporal dimensions. In this paper, we explore the flexibility from three aspects, namely the time-varying local spatial dependency, the dynamic temporal dependency, and the global spatial dependency. Then we propose a novel Dual Graph Gated Recurrent Neural Network (DG2RNN) to effectively model all these dependencies and offer flexible (multi-step) predictions for future traffic flow. Specifically, we design a Dual Graph Convolution Module to capture the local spatial dependency from two perspectives, namely road distance and adaptive correlation. To model the dynamic temporal dependency, we firstly develop a Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Layer to capture the forward and backward sequential contexts of historical traffic flow, then combine the derived hidden states with their various contributions learned by a temporal attention mechanism. Besides, we further design a spatial attention mechanism to learn the latent global spatial dependency among all locations to facilitate the prediction. Extensive experiments on three types of real-world traffic datasets demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-arts. Results also show our model has more stable performance for the flexible prediction with varying prediction horizons. The increasing aviation activities pose a challenge to ensure a safe and orderly flight. Trajectory prediction is one of the most important forecasting tasks in Air Traffic Management. Accurate prediction is reasonable for safe and orderly flight tasks in civil aviation monitoring. Points of interests play an important role in most land traffic prediction algorithms due to their abilities in positioning and marking. Compared with land traffic, the sparse way-points and shared airways make it difficult for flight trajectory prediction. A constrained Long Short-Term Memory network for flight trajectory prediction is proposed in this paper. According to the dynamic characteristics of the aircraft, we propose three kinds of constraints to climbing, cruising, and descending/approaching phases, in particular, they are Top of climb, Way-points, and Runway direction, correspondingly. Our model is able to keep long-term dependencies with dynamic physical constraints. Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise and Linear Least Squares are used in data segmentation and preprocessing. Sliding windows help maintain the continuity of trajectory. Four-dimensional spatial-temporal trajectory set consisting of spatial position and timestamps is used to prove the efficiency of our approach. Multiple ADS-B ground stations contribute to our experimental dataset. The widely used Long Short-Term Memory network, Markov Model, weighted Markov Model, Support Vector Machine, and Kalman Filter are used for comparison. Quantitative analysis demonstrates that our model outperforms the above-mentioned state-of-the-art models, and lays a good foundation for decision-making in different scenarios. Traffic signal control under oversaturated conditions presents a major challenge in metropolitan transportation networks. Previous works have demonstrated the ability of back-pressure methods to maximize network throughput and guarantee network stability. However, most of these methods are implemented adaptively. At present, fixed phase sequences are still widely used in traffic signal control systems. Herein, we propose a new back-pressure-based signal optimization method that combines fixed phase sequences with spatial model predictive control. First, a spatial prediction model for traffic flow was constructed to analyze the movement of vehicles between a central intersection and four peripheral intersections. Then, a multi-objective optimization model of traffic signal timing was developed with the purpose to reduce the risk of spillover and to balance the distribution of vehicles across the whole network. Next, a method based on the Multi-Objective Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm and Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to an Ideal Solution principle was used to achieve the Pareto frontier and the optimal solution. Finally, traffic simulations were performed in Paramics to assess the performance of the proposed method. The results of the simulations suggest the performance of the proposed method surpasses fixed-time control and cycle-based back-pressure schemes under oversaturated conditions. This paper proposes a control algorithm for IGS (Idle Stop and Go) systems and a stop prediction algorithm. A new ISG system has been introduced to reduce fuel consumption by improving the conventional ISG system for hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), including plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). When the HEVs stop or pass in front of a traffic light, the control algorithm determines when to turn off the internal combustion engine (ICE) while comparing the driving energy consumption. A stop prediction algorithm was proposed to determine whether a vehicle will stop at traffic lights. Traffic information and driving test results were obtained using a driver-in-the-loop simulator, and the stop prediction algorithm was verified through these results. The proposed ISG with the stop prediction function can reduce fuel consumption. With the developed traffic flow model, the effectiveness of the proposed ISG was evaluated in terms of the transportation system. In intelligent transportation system (ITS), accurate and real-time prediction of short-term multi-lane traffic flow with existing traffic data is an important part of urban traffic planning, traffic management and control. The data generated in the process of vehicle driving has the cooperative characteristics of multi-source, space-time and dynamic. Combining the data with high-performance computing or cloud computing, a new space-time information framework is designed, which is of great significance for the analysis and prediction of traffic flow, as well as intelligent traffic management, service and decision-making. This paper analyzes the statistical characteristics of urban road traffic flow from the two dimensions of time and space through the spatial-temporal correlation between multi-lane short term traffic flow in single observation point and multi observation points. We constructed a data fusion powered bi-directional long short term memory (DFBD-LSTM) model for individual lane and aggregate traffic flow, then used this model to predict multi-lane short term traffic flow. By taking individual lane traffic flow and aggregate traffic flow as different variables, the model produces more accurate predictions, which can better guide people to travel, alleviate the congestion of urban road traffic network to a certain extent, and improve the utilization rate and transportation efficiency of traffic road. We present an integrated spatio-temporal framework for multi-range traction power and speed prediction for connected vehicles (CVs). It combines data-driven and model-based strategies to enable CVs energy efficiency optimization. The proposed framework focuses on urban arterial corridors with signalized intersections, and leverages the historical and real-time data collected from CVs and infrastructure to predict location-specific traction loads (e.g. acceleration at intersections), and augment them with time-specific speed profiles (e.g., stop duration at intersections). A Bayesian network is developed to provide a long-term load prediction informed by probabilistic analysis of historical traffic data at intersections and between intersections. Moreover, a shockwave profile model is adopted for modeling the queuing process at intersections by leveraging vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications, providing a short-range prediction of the vehicle speed with an enhanced accuracy. The benefits of the proposed load prediction framework are demonstrated for energy management of connected hybrid electric vehicles (C-HEVs). By incorporating the predicted loads into a multi-horizon model predictive controller (MPC), integrated power and thermal management of light-duty C-HEVs is enabled over real-world driving cycles, demonstrating a near globally-optimal fuel consumption over the entire trip with a <1% deviation from dynamic programming (DP) results. Road link speed is often employed as an essential measure of traffic state in the operation of an urban traffic network. Not only real-time traffic demand but also signal timings and other local planning factors are major influential factors. This paper proposes a short-term traffic speed prediction approach, called PL-WGAN, for urban road networks, which is considered an important part of a novel parallel learning framework for traffic control and operation. The proposed method applies Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Nets (WGAN) for robust data-driven traffic modeling using a combination of generative neural network and discriminative neural network. The generative neural network models the road link features of the adjacent intersections and the control parameters of intersections using a hybrid graph block. In addition, the spatial-temporal relations are captured by stacking a graph convolutional network (GCN), a recurrent neural network (RNN), and an attention mechanism. A comprehensive computational experiment was carried out including comparing model prediction and computational performances with several state-of-the-art deep learning models. The proposed approach has been implemented and applied for predicting short-term link traffic speed in a largescale urban road network in Hangzhou, China. The results suggest that it provides a scalable and effective traffic prediction solution for urban road networks. Predicting the crowd flow in various areas of the city is of strategic importance for traffic control and public safety. In recent years, crowd flow prediction based on spatio-temporal data are gaining more and more attention. In order to better understand the current status of spatio-temporal crowd flow prediction research and global cooperation, we use scientometric methods, social network analysis, and Stochastic Actor-oriented Model (SAOM) to visualize and analyze the source journals, hotspot co-occurrence networks, and national cooperation networks based on the relevant literature included in the Web of Science database, so as to explore the current status and characteristics of related academic research. In addition, this paper constructs a technical framework based on Subject–Action– Object (SAO) structural information, and draws a technical roadmap containing five levels: data, technology, influence factors, objectives, and applications. The visual mapping of the evolutionary path of technology topics based on SAO structure information can assist in analyzing the evolutionary path of technology topics and their development trends. This study contributes to the existing knowledge system of spatio-temporal crowd flow prediction by proposing a new, integrated, and holistic knowledge map. With the acceleration of urbanization, the dynamic passenger flow has an ever-growing impact on the actual train operation. In this paper, we propose a learning based intelligent train regulation method with dynamic passenger flow prediction. To capture the characteristics of the dynamic metro passenger flow, a convolutional neural network is established to predict the real-time passenger flow from two dimensions including space and time. As the prediction accuracy is restricted by the insufficiency of the practical passenger flow data, a deep convolutional generative adversarial network is constructed to generate data that have the same distribution as the original passenger flow dataset. Then, by considering the effects of the dynamic passenger flow on the train operation and the train capacity constraints, the dynamic train regulation is formulated as a multi-stage optimal control problem with the objective function of minimizing the train traction energy consumption and the total traveling time of passengers. To efficiently obtain the optimal regulation strategy at each decision step, a deep Q-network algorithm is proposed to solve the formulated problem such the dimensionality curse caused by the excessive state space is avoided. The numerical experiments demonstrate the high efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed algorithm and model. As 5-th Generation (5G) mobile communication and edge computing technologies mature, Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) are gradually becoming a reality. In the 5G heterogeneous network, resources such as computing, storage, and communication are allocated to each Road Side Unit (RSU) to provide intelligent services for vehicles. However, the existing average allocation method based on historical experience can easily lead to over-concentration or insufficient resources, which causes waste and reduces the Quality of Service (QoS). To solve this problem, this paper proposes a Multi-Objective Neural Timeseries Prediction (M-ONTP) scheme for resource pre-allocation scenario in ITS. The scheme takes into account the complexity and diversity of service resource, innovatively treats the number of vehicles and communication power as joint optimization metrics, and proposes a multi-objective learning model. Benefiting from the vehicle data collected by RSUs in real time, we utilize historical traffic information to predict future road load and rely on Software Defined Network (SDN) to design a flexible resource pre-allocated architecture for ITS. To enhance the effectiveness of feature capture, M-ONTP also organically integrates various neural networks, which can appropriately handle large-scale time-series traffic flow. And we choose two layers of road data for fitting, which ensures that the model has a wide horizon to receive sufficient information. SUMO-based simulation experiments show that our scheme accurately realizes the prediction of joint objective and has significant performance advantage over other models. Meanwhile, our pre-allocation strategy reduces the total resource consumption by about 7%, increases the sufficiency rate by about 7%, and decreases the redundancy by about 12% while ensuring enough service resource to maintain normal QoS, which validates the effectiveness of M-ONTP. Accurate and timely traffic flow prediction is crucial for intelligent transportation systems (ITS). Recent advances in graph-based neural networks have achieved promising prediction results. However, some challenges remain, especially regarding graph construction and the time complexity of models. In this paper, we propose a multi-stream feature fusion approach to extract and integrate rich features from traffic data and leverage a data-driven adjacent matrix instead of the distance-based matrix to construct graphs. We calculate the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between monitor stations to obtain the initial adjacent matrix and fine-tune it while training. As to the model, we construct a multi-stream feature fusion block (MFFB) module, which includes a three-channel network and the softattention mechanism. The three-channel networks are graph convolutional neural network (GCN), gated recurrent unit (GRU) and fully connected neural network (FNN), which are used to extract spatial, temporal and other features, respectively. The soft-attention mechanism is utilized to integrate the obtained features. The MFFB modules are stacked, and a fully connected layer and a convolutional layer are used to make predictions. We conduct experiments on two real-world traffic prediction tasks and verify that our proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods within an acceptable time complexity. Accurate and reliable prediction of future motions of the nearby agents and effective environment understanding will contribute to high-quality and meticulous path planning for the automated vehicles under uncertainty and guarantee traffic safety for future real-world deployments. This task becomes more challenging in highly dynamic and complex scenarios such as unsignalized intersections where no lights exist to control vehicles behavior, or there are not multiple lines for the vehicles to anticipate drivers’ future intentions based on the lane in which they are driving. In this study, we introduce a novel deep learning-based methodology to anticipate vehicles path at unsignalized intersections. The method provides multimodal outputs to take into account the inherited uncertainty and multimodality nature of vehicles behavior. Our proposed model works based on dilated convolutional networks in combination with a mixture density layer. We then cluster various existing mixes into possible paths that are ranked based on probability. We assess the performance and generalization capability of our vehicle path prediction model using several metrics over a large naturalistic dataset containing more than 23800 vehicle trajectories. The obtained results reveal the higher performance of our path prediction approach compared with several baselines and benchmarks. Existing hierarchical planning and control architectures can cause the upper-level target trajectory passed to the lower-level tracking controller to be too conservative or impossible to track on slippery roads. To solve this problem, this paper proposes a new simultaneous planning and control scheme that determines the control inputs without explicit path planning and requires only information about the control objectives and safety constraints. First, we establish the vehicle stability boundary and the safety distance constraints to ensure that the vehicle avoids drifting and collisions on slippery roads. Moreover, realtime adaptive model predictive control (MPC) with online model linearization is designed to approximate the nonlinear programming as a quadratic program (QP), which allows the use of fast convex optimization tools. The steering angle and longitudinal acceleration are thus obtained. Finally, we design the controller to convert the longitudinal acceleration into an actuatable drive torque to avoid tire skidding on slippery surfaces. The simulation results show that under the conditions of low adhesion road and μ-split roads, the proposed algorithm makes the sideslip angle of the vehicle within 1 degree. In contrast, the sideslip angle of the hierarchical algorithm reaches 6 degrees, and the vehicle has a noticeable drift. The proposed algorithm dramatically improves stability and driving comfort. Short-term traffic speed prediction is fundamental to intelligent transportation systems (ITS), and the accuracy of the model largely determines the performance of real-time traffic control and management. In this study, a short-term traffic speed prediction method based on the spatial-temporal analysis of traffic flow and a combined deep-learning model, and a hybrid spatial-temporal feature selection algorithm (STFSA) of a convolutional neural network–gated recurrent unit (CNN-GRU)) is initially developed. Specifically, the STFSA is firstly employed to reconstruct the spatial-temporal matrix of traffic speed based on temporal continuity and spatial characteristics, and then this matrix is considered as the input feature of the prediction model. After this, the nonlinear fitting ability of the CNN is adopted to extract deep features from the convolutional and pooling layers for model training. Finally, by combining the timing and longrange dependence of the captured data with the forward GRU and the reverse GRU, the accuracy of the prediction result is further improved. The validity of the proposed model can be verified by comparing the prediction results with the actual traffic data. Accordingly, in the case study, the performance is compared with various benchmark methods under the same prediction scenario, verifying the superiority of the proposed model. Inherent uncertainties of the air transportation system (ATS) can induce unexpected anomalies in its operations such as deviations in flight schedules, sudden imbalances of demands and capacities, etc.. Current air traffic flow management (ATFM) models rarely consider both demand and capacity uncertainties in their algorithms, and generally focus on minimizing the flight delays under deterministic constraints. Thus, to bridge this gap, we propose a framework for en-route ATFM while scrutinizing uncertainties in en-route capacity and demand and their imbalance, via a chance constraint based probabilistic approach. The proposed framework plays a key role in ensuring the safety of the overall ATS in terms of maintaining the safety separation between flights and constraining the capacity of the sectors as well. Moreover, flight level assignments scheme is proposed based on the Base of Aircraft Data (BADA) of the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) with the objective of minimizing the fuel consumption. The model further minimizes the overall expected delay of the system using the control actions of ground holding, speed control, rerouting, and flight cancellations. At the implementation stage, two phases of ATFM as pre-tactical and tactical are considered, in which the former focuses on generating optimal trajectories and the latter focuses on real-time updates of flight plans. The computational complexity is reduced by shrinking the feasibility region and decomposing the problem into maximum weighted independent sets. The experimental results of realistic large-scale problems demonstrate the effectiveness and computational feasibility of our ATFM framework. Significant efforts have been made for vehicleto- vehicle communications that now enable the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). However, current IoV solutions are unable to capture traffic data both accurately and securely. Another drawback of current IoV models that are based on deep learning is that the methods used do not tune hyperparameters efficiently. In this paper, a new system known as Secure and Intelligent System for the Internet of Vehicles (SISIV) is developed. A deep learning architecture based on graph convolutional networks and an attention mechanism are implemented. In addition, blockchain technology is used to protect data transmission between nodes in the IoV system. Moreover, the hyperparameters of the generated deep learning model are intelligently selected using a branch-and-bound technique. To validate SISIV, experiments were conducted on four networked vehicle databases dealing with prediction problems. In terms of forecasting rate (> 90%), F-measure (> 80%), and attack detection (< 75%), the results clearly show the superiority of SISIV over baseline systems. Moreover, compared to state-of-the-art solutions based on traffic prediction, SISIV enables efficient and reliable prediction of traffic flow in an IoV context. With the increasing demand for intelligent transportation systems, short-term traffic flow prediction has become an important research direction. The memory unit of a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network can store data characteristics over a certain period of time, hence the suitability of this network for time series processing. This paper uses an improved Gate Recurrent Unit (GRU) neural network to study the time series of traffic parameter flows. The LSTM short-term traffic flow prediction based on the flow series is first investigated, and then the GRU model is introduced. The GRU can be regarded as a simplified LSTM. After extracting the spatial and temporal characteristics of the flow matrix, an improved GRU with a bidirectional positive and negative feedback called the Bi-GRU prediction model is used to complete the short-term traffic flow prediction and study its characteristics. The Rectified Adaptive (RAdam) model is adopted to improve the shortcomings of the common optimizer. The cosine learning rate attenuation is also used for the model to avoid converging to the local optimal solution and for the appropriate convergence speed to be controlled. Furthermore, the scientific and reliable model learning rate is set together with the adaptive learning rate in RAdam. In this manner, the accuracy of network prediction can be further improved. Finally, an experiment of the Bi-GRU model is conducted. The comprehensive Bi-GRU prediction results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Ramp metering offers great potential to mitigate traffic congestion and improve freeway management efficiency under traffic congestion conditions. This paper proposes an optimization program for freeway dynamic ramp metering based on Cell Transmission Model (CTM). This problem has been formulated as a discrete time optimal control problem with smooth state equations and constraints to meter traffic inflow from on-ramps. In the proposed model, the ‘min’ operators in the primal CTM are non-differentiable and thus, the corresponding optimal control problem cannot be solved directly using conventional gradient based methods. In this paper, we introduce a smooth approximation to approximate the ‘min’ operators and then a unified computational approach is developed to solve the problem. Theoretical analysis is carried out, showing that the optimal solution obtained from the approximated problem converges to the optimal solution of the primal CTM. Compared to the classical inequality relaxation method, our method can resolve the flow holding-back problem and reduce under fundamental diagram phenomenon. Compared with the Big-M method, our method has better efficiency. To achieve the desired traffic response control in real application, a series of online optimal control problems are solved using Model Predictive Control (MPC). Simulation studies show that our method can significantly improve freeway traffic management efficiency. Accurate airport traffic flow estimation is crucial for the secure and orderly operation of the aviation system. Recent advances in machine learning have achieved promising prediction results in the single-airport scenario. However, these works overlook the variational spatial interactions hidden among airports and show limited performances on the traffic flow prediction task for the aviation system which is composed of several airports. In this paper, we consider the multi-airport scenario and propose a novel spatio-temporal hybrid deep learning model to efficiently capture spatial correlations as well as temporal dependencies in a parallelized way. Specifically, we introduce the causal inference among airports to model their interactions and thus construct adaptive causality graphs in a data-driven manner to address the heterogeneity of airports. Furthermore, given that multi-source features are not applicable for all airports, a feature mask module is designated to adaptively select the features in spatial information mining. Extensive experiments are conducted on the real data of top-30 busiest airports in China. The results show that our spatio-temporal deep learning approach is superior to state-of-the-art methodologies and the improvement ratio is up to 4.7% against benchmarks. Ablation studies emphasize the power of the proposed adaptive causality graph and the feature mask module. All of these prove the effectiveness of the proposed methodology. The COVID-19 pandemic has severely affected urban transport patterns, including the way residents travel. It is of great significance to predict the demand of urban ridehailing for residents’ healthy travel, rational platform operation, and traffic control during the epidemic period. In this paper, we propose a deep learning model, called MOS-BiAtten, based on multi-head spatial attention mechanism and bidirectional attention mechanism for ride-hailing demand prediction. The model follows the encoder-decoder framework with a multi-output strategy for multi-steps prediction. The pre-predicted result and the historical demand data are extracted as two aspects of bidirectional attention flow, so as to further explore the complicated spatiotemporal correlations between the historical, present and future information. The proposed model is evaluated on the real-world dataset during COVID-19 in Beijing, and the experimental results demonstrate that MOS-BiAtten achieves a better performance compared with the state-of-art methods. Meanwhile, another dataset is used to verify the generalization performance of the model. Traffic prediction is vital to traffic planning, control, and optimization, which is necessary for intelligent traffic management. Existing methods mostly capture spatiotemporal correlations on a fine-grained traffic graph, which cannot make full use of cluster information in coarse-grained traffic graph. However, the flow variation of clusters in the coarse-grained traffic graph is more stable compared with nodes in the fine-grained traffic graph. And the flow variation of a fine-grained node is generally consistent with the trend of the cluster to which the node belongs. Thus information in the coarse-grained traffic graph can guide feature learning in the fine-grained traffic graph. To this end, we propose a Spatiotemporal Multiscale Graph Convolutional Network (SMGCN) that explores spatiotemporal correlations on a multiscale graph. Specifically, given a fine-grained traffic graph, we first generate a coarse-grained traffic graph by graph clustering, and extract spatiotemporal correlations on both fine-grained and coarse-grained traffic graphs. Then we propose a cross-scale fusion (CF) to implement information diffusion between the fine-grained and coarse-grained traffic graphs. Moreover, we employ an adaptive dynamic graph convolution network to mine both static and dynamic spatial features. We evaluate SMGCN on real-world datasets and obtain a 1.18% − 3.32% improvement over state-of-the-arts. Traffic problems continue to deteriorate because of increasing population in urban areas that rely on many modes of transportation, the transportation infrastructure has achieved considerable strides in the last several decades. This has led to an increase in congestion control difficulties, which directly affect citizens through air pollution, fuel consumption, traffic law breaches, noise pollution, accidents, and loss of time. Traffic prediction is an essential aspect of an intelligent transportation system in smart cities because it helps reduce overall traffic congestion. This article aims to design and enforce a traffic prediction scheme that is efficient and accurate in forecasting traffic flow. Available traffic flow prediction methods are still unsuitable for real-world applications. This fact motivated us to work on a traffic flow forecasting issue using Vision Transformers (VTs). In this work, VTs were used in conjunction with Convolutional neural networks (CNN) to predict traffic congestion in urban spaces on a city-wide scale. In our proposed architecture, a traffic image is fed to a CNN, which generates feature maps. These feature maps are then fed to the VT, which employs the dual techniques of tokenization and projection. Tokenization is used to convert features into tokens containing Vision information, which are then sent to projection, where they are transformed into feature maps and ultimately delivered to LSTM. The experimental results demonstrate that the vision transformer prediction method based on Spatio-temporal characteristics is an excellent way of predicting traffic flow, particularly during anomalous traffic situations. The proposed technology surpasses traditional methods in terms of precision, accuracy and recall and aids in energy conservation. Through rerouting, the proposed work will benefit travellers and reduce fuel use. Accurate traffic prediction under various conditions is an important but challenging task. Due to the complicated non-stationary temporal dynamics in traffic flow time series and spatial dependencies on roadway networks, there is no particular method that is clearly superior to all others. Here, we focus on investigating ensemble learning that benefits from multiple base models, and propose a traffic-condition-aware ensemble approach that acts as a decision maker by stacking multiple predictions based on dynamic traffic conditions. To sense traffic conditions, we apply the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to capture the spatiotemporal patterns embedded in traffic flow. Then, the high-level features extracted by CNN are used to generate weights to ensemble multiple predictions of different models. Extensive experiments are performed with a real traffic dataset from the Caltrans Performance Measurement System. We compare the proposed approach with competitive models, including Gradient Boosting Regression Tree (GBRT) model, Weight Regression model, Support Vector Regression (SVR) model, Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) model, Historical Average (HA) model and CNN model. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can effectively improve the performances of traffic flow prediction. Driver attention prediction can solve the problem of ‘Where should the driver pay attention?’. Most previous methods are designed to predict regional attention with redundant regions. Furthermore, popular spatial-temporal feature extraction networks such as ConvLSTM and 3D-CNN are difficult to achieve real-time. To overcome these difficulties, we propose an Adaptive Short-temporal Induced Aware Fusion Network (ASIAF-Net) for region-level and object-level driver attention prediction.1 In ASIAF-Net, we design an Attention Related Spatial Feature Encoder (AF-Encoder) and an Induced Aware Fusion Network (IAF-Net) as the main network; with an Association Analysis Cell (AAC), the AF-Encoder makes it possible to effectively capture the relationship information of different objects. Considering most vital visual cues from moving objects, we propose a Self-adaptive Short-temporal Feature Extraction Module (SSFE-Module) to obtain inter-frame motion features. In IAF-Net, a Multi-scale Driver Attention Region Prediction Branch is designed to predict the regional attention, and an Object Saliency Estimation Branch is proposed to fuse the perception results and the regional attention map to estimate the object-level attention. Experiments show that the proposed ASIAF-Net can predict driver’s attention on regions and objects more robustly and precisely than state-of-the-art methods on three datasets, and that it achieves real-time on our ADAS platform. In the foreseeable future, a coexistence of humandriven vehicles (HVs) and connected automated vehicles (CAVs) is expected in traffic flow systems. Effectively controlling CAVs to improve overall traffic performance and stability is a crucial yet challenging issue, especially when considering the uncertain behavior of HVs. This study proposes an optimal CAV controller for mixed connected traffic based on the adaptive model predictive control (AMPC) method. To mitigate the instability of the mixed platoon, the concept of loose disturbance string stability (LDSS) is introduced and integrated into the controller. Instead of using a fixed platoon size, a platoon formation criterion is established to dynamically calculate the number of vehicles in a platoon, taking into account the uncertain behavior of HVs, such as sudden deceleration and lane changes. An adaptive parameter tuning approach is incorporated into the MPC-based control framework to enhance the control performance in terms of stability, accuracy and disturbance recovery ability. The effects of the proposed CAV controller on overall traffic performance are investigated through two simulation experiments. In the first experiment, the performance of the proposed controller and LDSS are verified under three scenarios: sudden deceleration, vehicle leaving, and vehicle cut-in. In the second experiment, the proposed AMPC method is compared with two existing models: the linear quadratic regulation -based and acceleration-based connected cruise control models. The comparison results demonstrate that the proposed control model ensures LDSS and outperforms the other two approaches in terms of disturbance mitigation, albeit with a slight sacrifice of traffic efficiency. Congestion recognition is necessary for vehicle routing, traffic control, and many other applications in intelligent transportation systems. Besides, traffic facilities in the three-dimensional road network, which contains the fundamental spatiotemporal features for congestion recognition, provides multi-source traffic information. To exploit these traffic big data, in this paper, we propose an attention mechanism-based digraph convolution network (ADGCN) enabled framework to tackle the congestion recognition problem. It can be divided into two parts, spatial relevance modeling and temporal relevance modeling. At first, the representation incorporates spatiotemporal traffic information with the three-dimensional urban network, and partially decouples the global network topology to a singleknot digraph. Then a digraph-based convolution network is used to capture high-order spatial features. Finally, to proceed with time-series features, the multi-modal attention mechanism is introduced to catch the long-range temporal dependence and the congestion classifier is defined accordingly. This distinguishes the proposed model from the conventional congestion recognition methods. Comprehensive experiments are conducted based on real traffic data. The results demonstrate the advantages of the proposed framework over the existing spatiotemporal analysis methods. Auto machine learning recently has been introduced as a trending technique for learning applications, including smart transportation. In this study, we focus on applying auto-machine learning for hyperparameter tuning to learn traffic datasets at the main regions of highway systems. Particularly, deep learning models have been recently introduced as emergent methods for traffic prediction. However, training deep learning models requires expensive works (e.g., time-consuming and human expertise), especially in terms of determining the configurations of hyperparameters in the models. In this regard, this paper introduces an automated framework for hyperparameter tuning to learn traffic datasets at an ecosystem in terms of reducing time-consuming tasks. Specifically, we first propose the HyperNet framework, using advanced data science techniques (e.g., Bayesian optimization and meta-learning) for the automated hyperparameter search process. Then, a deep learning model with the long short term memory network based on the HyperNet framework has presented for learning the temporal variation of traffic datasets at main regions of highway traffic systems. Regarding the experiment, we take data from the Korean highway system into account as a case study to evaluate the proposed approach. The evaluation indicates promising results of the proposed framework for learning multiple datasets of the traffic highway systems. Existing multi-class cell transmission model (CTM) based methodologies for signal timing or traffic assignment may transfer prioritized transit vehicles from one cell to the next one before processing their preceding passenger cars. In addition, existing CTM-based methodologies process a proportion of a slow-moving transit vehicle in each time step. As such a portion of each transit vehicle remains in each cell and it never clears them. This paper presents constraints to project the position of transit vehicles based on the speed and cell occupancy variations between different classes of vehicles and incorporates them into the CTM. The resulting optimization program is a mixed-integer nonlinear problem. We used a distributed receding horizon control framework to solve it in real-time. The proposed formulation is executed in a simulated arterial street with four signalized intersections in Springfield, IL with different traffic volume levels and transit vehicle frequencies. The results showed that the proposed algorithm addressed the mentioned issues of the existing multi-class CTM, and yielded more efficient network performance than the conventional transit signal priority-based (CTSP) systems. The proposed formulation reduced average bus delay by 1% to 70% and car delay by 52% to 76% compared to CTSP. The predictive cruise control (PCC) is a promising method to optimize energy consumption of vehicles, especially the heavy-duty vehicles (HDV). Due to the limited sensing range and computational capabilities available on-board, the conventional PCC system can only obtain a sub-optimal speed trajectory based on a shorter prediction horizon. The recently emerging information and communication technologies such as vehicular communication, cloud computing, and Internet of Things provide huge potentials to improve the traditional PCC system. In this paper, we propose a general framework for the enhanced cloudbased PCC system which integrates a data-driven traffic predictive model and the instantaneous control algorithms. Specifically, we introduce a novel multi-view CNN deep learning algorithm to predict traffic situation based on the historical and real-time traffic data collected from fields, and the time-varying adaptive model predictive control (MPC) to calculate the instantaneous optimal speed profile with the aim of minimizing energy consumption. We verified our approach via simulations in which the impact of various traffic condition on the PCC-enabled HDV has been fully evaluated. In recent years, advanced information communication technology (such as beyond 5G and 6G) will enable convenient end-to-end communication. This would allow collections of individual preferences as predictions of travellers’ perceptions, and thus support data analysis and traffic control in a dynamic circumstance. Therefore, analysis of nonlinearly modelled perceptions and perception-based user equilibrium are the necessary problem we encounter. This research explores the existence characteristics of perception-based stochastic user equilibrium (P-SUE), a type of stochastic user equilibrium where travelers make route choices according to their perceptive traffic circumstances instead of actual ones. A nonlinear perception model with stochasticity is developed and the traffic arrivals are approximately transformed from Poisson-distributed to Normaldistributed. From a static perspective, we develop a P-SUE model with a heterogeneous traveler community and discuss the interaction among travelers’ attitude, grouping and static perception-based stochastic user equilibrium (P-SSUE). After embedding a day-to-day learning process into the P-SSUE model, we further explore evolutionary dynamics of the equilibrium. Several scenarios are provided to investigate effects and sensitivity of traveler-related and road-related factors. It is found that learning produces perturbation and makes the existence condition of P-SSUE more complicated; the convergence processes of P-SSUEs are significantly shortened as the learning rate increases to higher than 0.1. Traffic forecasting aims to capture complex spatialtemporal dependencies and non-linear dynamics, which plays an indispensable role in intelligent transportation systems and other domains like neuroscience, climate, etc. Most recent works rely on graph convolutional networks (GCN) to model the dependencies and the dynamics. However, the over-smoothing issue of GCN would produce indistinguishable features among nodes, leading to poor expressivity and weak capability of modeling complex dependencies and dynamics. To address this issue, we present a novel clustering spatial-temporal (ClusterST) unit, which incorporates unsupervised learning into GCN for extracting discriminative features. Specifically, we first exploit a neural network to learn a dynamic clustering, i.e., learning to partition the neighbors of each node into clusters at each time step. Two probabilistic losses are proposed to improve the separability of clusters. Then, the extracted features of different clusters can be distinguished. Based on the dynamically formed clusters, a vanilla GCN is applied to aggregate features within each cluster. By purely exploiting such a ClusterST unit, large improvements over the state-of-the-art are achieved. Furthermore, ClusterST units with a different number of clusters can be regarded as basic components to construct an inception-like ClusterST network for going deeper. We evaluate the framework on two real-world large-scale traffic datasets and observe an average improvement of 18.19% and 7.62% over state-of-theart baselines, respectively. The code and models will be publicly available. This paper discusses the application of coalitional model predictive control (MPC) to freeways traffic networks, where the goal is reducing the time spent by the drivers through a dynamic setting of variable speed limits (VSL) and ramp metering. The prediction model METANET is used to represent the traffic flows evolution. The system behavior and objective function lead to a non-convex and non-linear optimization problem, which can only be solved in a centralized fashion for small networks. The underlying motivation of this paper is the continued advance of clustering methods in the control of large-scale and spatially distributed systems. The global freeway system is partitioned into a set of coupled sub-stretches, which in turn are assigned to the different agents involved in the control problem. These local controllers can dynamically assemble into coalitions to take coordinated measures. In this work, a top-down approach is considered: the bottom layer consists of the set of controllers that compute the VSL and ramp-metering across time; and the supervisory layer changes periodically the information exchange structure to promote coalitions of those controllers that bring greater performance to the global system. In this way, a balance is sought between optimality and efficiency. Finally, the coalitional approach is simulated on a stretch of traffic freeway where cooperation with adjacent sub-stretches is allowed. This purpose of the research is to explore the construction status and prediction performance of intelligent transportation systems in the road network of smart cities based on 5G (5th Generation Mobile Communication Technology) network, and further intellectualize the smart city. Aiming at the diversity and complexity of regional traffic influencing factors of road network in the construction of smart city, this research carries out resource real-time load balancing scheduling from the perspective of 5G heterogeneous network. Meanwhile, CNN (convolutional neural network) in the introduced deep learning algorithm is improved, and finally an intelligent traffic prediction model is constructed based on 5G load balancing and AlexNet network. The model is simulated and its performance is analyzed. The results show that the algorithm proposed is compared with LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory), CNN, RNN (Recurrent Neural Network), VGGNet (Visual Geometry Group Network), and BN (Bayesian network) models regarding Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1. It is found that the road network prediction accuracy of the algorithm proposed is 94.05%, which is at least 4.29% higher than that of the model algorithm proposed by other scholars. The analysis of network data transmission synchronization performance suggests that there are obvious performance improvements in access delay, access collision rate, reliability, and network throughput. Among them, the packet loss rate is lower than 0.1, the access collision rate is basically stable at about 0, the access time is stable at about 75ms, and the sending throughput is basically maintained at about 1, which is significantly better than the performance of other algorithms. Therefore, the intelligent transportation system can achieve better data transmission performance under the premise of ensuring high prediction performance, with prominent instantaneity, which can provide experimental basis for the intelligent development of transportation in smart cities. Dispatching emergency vehicles (EVs) to fatal accidents or fires as fast as possible is vital to save lives; however, minimizing an EV’s travel time to the rescue spot is still an open challenge. This work presents a path planning and traffic clear-out scheduling scheme to lessen the EV’s travel time in the vision of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). Initially, the system searches a list of candidate paths to the rescue spot with the estimated time of arrival (ETA) at the EVs’ maximum speed, regardless of the traffic conditions. After that, a vehicle clearout process evaluates the delay time of clearing out the traffic obstacles on each path to identify the fastest driving path. Finally, the system estimates and issues the signal preemption schedules for the junctions of the selected route to coordinate the traffic flows and let the EV pass through smoothly. From the macro perspective, this work seeks to control the dynamic traffic proactively to reserve a lane for the EV – a feasible approach in the future of connected vehicles. This controllable model apparently contrasts with the conventional techniques of finding the least-cost paths with the uncertainty of traffic state prediction or traffic light preemption alone at the intersections. The simulation shows that our approach can outperform the state-of-the-art solutions in terms of the EV’s travel time reduction, particularly if the congestion or heavy load road segments appear on the selected route but far from the departure location of the EV. Truck platooning is a technology that is expected to become widespread in the coming years. Apart from the numerous benefits that it brings, its potential effects on the overall traffic situation need to be studied further, especially at bottlenecks and ramps. Assuming we can control the platoons from the infrastructure, they can be used as controlled moving bottlenecks, actuating control actions on the rest of the traffic, and potentially improving the throughput of the whole system. In this work, we use a tandem queueing model with moving bottlenecks as a prediction model to calculate control actions for the platoons. We use platoon speeds and formations as control inputs, and design a control law for throughput improvement of a highway section with a stationary bottleneck. By postponing and shaping the inflow to the bottleneck, we are able to avoid capacity drop, which significantly reduces the total time spent of all vehicles.We derived the estimated improvement in throughput that is achieved by applying the proposed control law, and tested it in a simulation study, with multi-class cell transmission model with platoons used as the simulation model, finding that the median delay of all vehicles is reduced by 75.6% compared to the uncontrolled case. Notably, although they are slowed down while actuating control actions, platooned vehicles experience less delay compared to the uncontrolled case, since they avoid going through congestion at the bottleneck. The booming self-driving cars need to understand the behaviors of other road users for better performance. Recognizing pedestrians’ crossing intentions is one of the most critical capabilities of self-driving cars to guarantee safe operations in the urban environment. Some researchers try to predict the future trajectories of pedestrians to avoid a potential collision. Others extract skeleton features from pedestrians to detect specific actions related to the crossing intention. All these methods either neglect the abundant appearance information of pedestrians, or work poorly under severe conditions, e.g., pedestrians standing far away, dim light, and occlusions. In this work, a pedestrian crossing intention recognition (PCIR) framework is proposed to recognize pedestrians’ crossing intention. A module for searching targets of interest is introduced to find the pedestrians who are likely to cross the streets, and perform scene perception simultaneously. An action recognition module utilizes a 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) to automatically extract spatiotemporal features that imply early actions before crossing, like limb movements. A distance encoding module makes full use of the contextual cues, e.g., distances between pedestrians and the oncoming vehicle, local traffic scenes around pedestrians, and vehicle speeds, to improve the recognition accuracy obtained from the action recognition module only. Finally, the PCIR framework fuses these factors to predict pedestrians’ crossing intentions by minimizing a focal loss. Experimental evaluations verify the effectiveness of the proposed method in recognizing pedestrians’ crossing intentions. Comparisons with the skeleton-based methods reveal the robustness of the PCIR framework in the urban environment. Although considerable methods have been developed for the performance evaluation of signalized intersections using sampled vehicle trajectories, most of them aim at estimating a single parameter and cannot describe the entire arrival–departure process of the traffic flow. This significantly constrains the application of these methods for a comprehensive evaluation and efficient optimization of signalized intersections. In this paper, we propose a cumulative flow diagram (CFD) estimation and prediction method using sampled vehicle trajectories. It can be used to calculate multiple performance measures—traffic volume, queue length, average delay, and total delay—based on the estimated CFD for the current signal timing plan. Concurrently, it can be further employed for signal control optimization based on the predicted CFDs for candidate signal timing plans. The core idea of the proposed method is to generate the cumulative arrival curve based on the arrival characteristics of the sampled vehicles, and then fit the queue leaving points to obtain the cumulative departure curve. Thereby, given the current or any candidate signal timing plan, we can estimate or predict the CFDs by updating the sampled vehicle arrivals. The proposed method is evaluated using both simulation and empirical data. The simulation results yield that the average estimation error of the four performance measures is 10.3% under a real-world level penetration rate of 10%. Meanwhile, similar accuracies are achieved for the CFD prediction. The empirical results show that under a penetration rate of 8.6%, the estimation errors of the traffic volume and queue length are 2.7% and 3.3%, respectively. Estimating traffic flow states at unmeasured urban locations provides a cost-efficient solution for many ITS applications. In this work, a geostatistical framework, kriging is extended in such a way that it can both estimate and predict traffic volume and speed at various unobserved locations, in real-time. In the paper, different distance metrics for kriging are evaluated. Then, a new, data-driven one is formulated, capturing the similarity of measurement sites. Then, with multidimensional scaling the distances are transformed into a hyperspace, where the kriging algorithm can be used. As a next step, temporal dependency is injected into the estimator via extending the hyperspace with an extra dimension, enabling for short horizon traffic flow prediction. Additionally, a temporal correction is proposed to compensate for minor changes in traffic flow patterns. Numerical results suggest that the spatio-temporal prediction can make more accurate predictions compared to other distance metric-based kriging algorithms. Additionally, compared to deep learning, the results are on par while the algorithm is more resilient against traffic pattern changes. Predicting if passengers in a connecting flight will lose their connection is paramount for airline profitability. We present novel machine learning-based decision support models for the different stages of connection flight management, namely for strategic, pre-tactical, tactical and post-operations. We predict missed flight connections in an airline’s hub airport using historical data on flights and passengers, and analyse the factors that contribute additively to the predicted outcome for each decision horizon. Our data is high-dimensional, heterogeneous, imbalanced and noisy, and does not inform about passenger arrival/departure transit time.We employ probabilistic encoding of categorical classes, data balancing with Gaussian Mixture Models, and boosting. For all planning horizons, our models attain an area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) higher than 0.93. SHAP value explanations of our models indicate that scheduled/perceived connection times contribute the most to the prediction, followed by passenger age and whether border controls are required. Accurate estimation of short-term traffic flow, which can help to assist travelers make better route choices, is a significant research field of intelligent transportation system. In order to extract complex spatiotemporal features from a small amount of available traffic data, in this paper we propose a novel Deep Graph Gaussian Processes (DGGPs) for short-term traffic flow prediction. First, in order to accurately describe the relationship between vertices in time series, this paper proposes an attention kernel. Based on this, the Aggregation Gaussian Process uses attention kernel as the covariance function, which overcomes the problem that the existing Gaussian processes and the deep Gaussian processes cannot effectively obtain dynamic spatial features. Second, DGGPs are constructed by the Aggregation Gaussian Process (AGP), the Temporal Convolutional Gaussian Process (TCGP) and the Gaussian process with linear kernel, to solve the existing short-term traffic flow forecasting models cannot obtain complex spatiotemporal features from a small amount of available data. We verify that the attention kernel helps to the proposed model convergence on the three data sets. At the same time, the proposed DGGP can obtain spatiotemporal features from the situation with less available spatial information or temporal information, accurately predict short-term traffic flow, and quantify temporal uncertainty. Ramp metering has been considered as one of the most effective approaches of dealing with the traffic congestion on the freeways. The modelling of the freeway traffic flow dynamics is challenging because of its non-linearity and uncertainty. Recently, Koopman operator, which transfers a non-linear system to a linear system in an infinite-dimensional space, has been studied for modelling complex dynamics. In this paper, we propose a data-driven modelling approach based on neural networks, denoted by deep Koopman model, to learn a finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator. To consider the sequential relations of the ramps and main roads on the freeway, a long short-term memory network is applied. Furthermore, a model predictive controller with the trained deep Koopman model is proposed for the real-time control of the ramp metering on the freeway. To validate the performance of the proposed approach, experiments based on the simulation in the traffic simulation software Simulation of Urban MObility (SUMO) environment are conducted. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on both the dynamics prediction and the real-time control of the ramp metering. Traffic control and management applications require the full realization of traffic flow data. Frequently, such data are acquired by traffic sensors with two issues: it is not practicable or even possible to place traffic sensors on every link in a network; sensors do not provide direct information about origin–destination (O–D) demand flows. Therefore, it is imperative to locate the best places to deploy traffic sensors and then augment the knowledge obtained from this link flow sample to predict the entire traffic flow of the network. This article provides a resilient deep learning (DL) architecture combined with a global sensitivity analysis tool to solve O–D estimation and sensor location problems simultaneously. The proposed DL architecture is based on the stacked sparse autoencoder (SAE) model for accurately estimating the entire O–D flows of the network using link flows, thus reversing the conventional traffic assignment problem. The SAE model extracts traffic flow characteristics and derives a meaningful relationship between traffic flow data and network topology. To train the proposed DL architecture, synthetic link flow data were created randomly from the historical demand data of the network. Finally, a global sensitivity analysis was implemented to prioritize the importance of each link in the O–D estimation step to solve the sensor location problem. Two networks of different sizes were used to validate the performance of the model. The efficiency of the proposed method for solving the combination of traffic flow estimation and sensor location problems was confirmed from a low root-mean-square error with a reduction in the number of link flows required. Traffic prediction plays an essential role in intelligent transportation system. Accurate traffic prediction can assist route planing, guide vehicle dispatching, and mitigate traffic congestion. This problem is challenging due to the complicated and dynamic spatio-temporal dependencies between different regions in the road network. Recently, a significant amount of research efforts have been devoted to this area, especially deep learning method, greatly advancing traffic prediction abilities. The purpose of this paper is to provide a comprehensive survey on deep learning-based approaches in traffic prediction from multiple perspectives. Specifically, we first summarize the existing traffic prediction methods, and give a taxonomy. Second, we list the state-of-the-art approaches in different traffic prediction applications. Third, we comprehensively collect and organize widely used public datasets in the existing literature to facilitate other researchers. Furthermore, we give an evaluation and analysis by conducting extensive experiments to compare the performance of different methods on a real-world public dataset. Finally, we discuss open challenges in this field. Transit Signal Priority (TSP) is a broadly used traffic signal control strategy designed for reducing transit delays at signalized intersections. Although recent TSP systems began to consider more objectives, TSPs that addressed transit reliability issues commonly focused on improving schedule adherence and were only able to reduce schedule delays by expediting buses. Buses running ahead of the schedule were not considered. This paper proposed a dual-objective two-way TSP algorithm (D2 TSP) using Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). D2 TSP concurrently optimizes transit delays and reliability (i.e., headway adherence) by expediting late buses or delaying early buses. Further, the DRL agents were enhanced with a coordination algorithm for an optimized solution balancing opposite directions. This D2 TSP reacts adaptively and efficiently to real-time bus performance using data provided by readily available technology (loop detector) at low communication frequencies.We trained and tested this algorithm in a stochastic microsimulation environment in Aimsun Next that modelled a transit route segment with reliability issues in the City of Toronto. The performance of D2 TSP was compared with four baseline scenarios, one without TSP, one with the current TSP algorithm used in the field in the City of Toronto, one conditional TSP with an arrival prediction model, and one using DRL agents with a First-Come-First-Served logic. D2 TSP demonstrated its advantages in providing an efficient and balanced solution in reducing headway variability and travel time for both directions. Connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) have the potential to improve traffic throughput and achieve a more efficient utilization of the available roadway infrastructure. They also have the potential to reduce energy consumption through traffic motion harmonization, even when operating in mixed traffic with other human-driven vehicles. The key to realizing these potentials are coordinated control schemes that can be implemented in a distributed manner with the CAVs. In this paper, we propose a distributed predictive control framework that features a two-dimensional maneuver planner incorporating explicit coordination constraints between connected vehicles operating in mixed traffic at various penetration levels. The framework includes a distributed implementation of a reference speed assigner that estimates local traffic speed from on-board measurements and communicated information. We present an extensive evaluation of the proposed framework in traffic micro-simulations at various CAV penetrations from traffic flow, energy use, and lane utilization points of view. Results are compared to a baseline scenario with no CAVs, as well as, a benchmark one-dimensional planner. This work proposes a fuel efficient vehicle speed control strategy for a connected and autonomous vehicle to pass the intersection (the eco-approach application). A control framework is developed to integrate traffic prediction (enabled by connectivity) and speed optimization. The traffic prediction is based on traffic flow model and can be applied to mixedtraffic scenarios where both connected and non-connected vehicles are on the road. Real-time information from connected vehicles and signal lights provides ‘partial’ measurement of the traffic states. The unknown traffic states are estimated using an observer (Unscented Kalman Filter). Uncertainties in the traffic prediction are systematically considered during the vehicle speed optimization to improve the robustness of the optimal control. Effects of powertrain states (the transmission gear ratio) on fuel consumption are considered as well. The vehicle speed optimization problem is real-time implementable using an efficient nonlinear programming solver. The optimal speed control strategy is evaluated in both a simulated traffic scenario and a real-world traffic scenario. In the simulated traffic scenario, fuel benefits vary from 5.3% to 9.4% as the penetration rate of connectivity increases. This is satisfactory compared to 11.7% fuel benefits with perfect traffic prediction. In the realworld traffic scenario, experimental results show that 6.9% fuel benefits can be achieved with two connected preceding vehicles and 11.2% fuel benefits can be obtained with perfect prediction. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the traffic prediction and the optimal vehicle speed control strategy. This study aims to leverage the advances of connected automated vehicle (CAV) technology to design an ecodriving and platooning system that can improve both fuel and operational efficiency of vehicles on the freeways. The proposed algorithm optimizes CAVs’ trajectories with three objectives, including travel time minimization, fuel consumption minimization, and traffic safety improvement, following a two-stage control logic. The first stage, designed for CAV trajectory planning, is carried out with two optimization models. The first model functions to predict the freeway traffic states in the near future and accordingly optimize CAVs’ desired speed profile to minimize total freeway travel time. Notably, the interactions between CAVs and human-driven vehicles (HVs) are described in the embedded traffic flow model and the optimization can fully account for CAVs’ impact to HVs’ speeds. Then grounded on the obtained speed profile, the second eco-driving model would further update it so as to platoon CAVs and minimize their fuel consumption. The second stage, for real-time control purpose, is developed to ensure the operational safety of CAVs. Particularly, based on the speed profile from the first stage, real-time adaptions would be placed on CAVs to dynamically adjust speeds, in response to local driving conditions. To evaluate the proposed algorithms, this study selects a freeway segment of I-15 in Salt Lake City as the study site. The extensive numerical simulation results confirmed the effectiveness of the proposed framework in both mitigating freeway congestion and reducing vehicles’ fuel consumption. A promising way to improve efficiency in highway on-ramp regions is to control connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass the merging section sequentially. The primary objective of this paper is to incorporate the reinforcement learning (RL) technique into vehicle merging control to achieve global cooperation. A communication protocol among RL agents is integrated with the Soft Actor-Critic (CSAC) algorithm. The parallel SAC agents with a parameter-sharing structure cooperate to optimize the common reward function. It enables CAVs to know the actions of each other so that they proactively negotiate to adjust speeds. We designed a parsimonious state representation containing crucial merging information to speed up the RL training. The effects of the merging control strategy were investigated with the simulation model in scenarios with different CAV penetration rates and traffic flow compositions. Results showed that the CSAC-based merging strategy generated collision-free merging trajectories with a short travel time while guaranteeing traffic safety in various traffic conditions. Four baselines (including two rule-based and two RL-based merging strategies) were applied in the same scenarios for comparison. It was found that the proposed merging strategy took the safest merging behaviors (zero traffic conflicts) and reduced the most significant travel time (56.9%). This article proposes a model to estimate the probability of a vehicle reaching a near-term goal state using one or multiple lane changes based on parameters corresponding to traffic conditions and driving behavior. The proposed model not only has broad application in path planning and autonomous vehicle navigation, it can also be incorporated in advance warning systems to reduce traffic delay during recurrent and non-recurrent congestion. The model is first formulated for a two-lane road segment through systemic reduction of the number of parameters and transforming the problem into an abstract statistical form, for which the probability can be calculated numerically. It is then extended to cases with a higher number of lanes using the law of total probability. VISSIM simulations are used to validate the predictions of the model and study the effect of different parameters on the probability. For most cases, simulation results are within 4% of model predictions, and the effect of different parameters such as driving behavior and traffic density on the probability match our expectation. The model can be implemented with near real-time performance, with computation time increasing linearly with the number of lanes. Accurate spatial-temporal prediction is a fundamental building block of many real-world applications such as traffic scheduling and management, environment policy making, and public safety. This problem is still challenging due to nonlinear, complicated, and dynamic spatial-temporal dependencies. To address these challenges, we propose a novel embedded spatial-temporal network (ESTNet), which extracts efficient features to model the dynamic correlations and then exploits three-dimension convolution to synchronously model the spatial-temporal dependencies. Specifically, we propose multirange graph convolution networks for extracting multi-scale static features from the fine-grained road network. Meanwhile, dynamic features are extracted from real-time traffic using a gated recurrent unit network. These features can be applied to identify the dynamic and flexible correlations among sensors and make it possible to exploit a three-dimension convolution unit (3DCon) to simultaneously model the spatial-temporal dependencies. Furthermore, we propose a residual network by stacking multiple 3DCon to capture the nonlinear and complicated dependencies. The effectiveness and superiority of ESTNet are verified on two real-world datasets, and experiments show ESTNet outperforms the state-of-the-art with a significant margin. The code and models will be publicly available. Predicting traffic flow plays an important role in reducing traffic congestion and improving transportation efficiency for smart cities. Traffic Flow Prediction (TFP) in the smart city requires efficient models, highly reliable networks, and data privacy. As traffic data, traffic trajectory can be transformed into a graph representation, so as to mine the spatio-temporal information of the graph for TFP. However, most existing work adopt a central training mode where the privacy problem brought by the distributed traffic data is not considered. In this paper, we propose a Federated Deep Learning based on the Spatial- Temporal Long and Short-Term Networks (FedSTN) algorithm to predict traffic flow by utilizing observed historical traffic data. In FedSTN, each local TFP model deployed in an edge computing server includes three main components, namely Recurrent Longterm Capture Network (RLCN) module, Attentive Mechanism Federated Network (AMFN) module, and Semantic Capture Network (SCN) module. RLCN can capture the long-term spatialtemporal information in each area. AMFN shares short-term spatio-temporal hidden information when it trains its local TFP model by the additive homomorphic encryption approach based on Vertical Federated Learning (VFL). We employ SCN to capture semantic features such as irregular non-Euclidean connections and Point of Interest (POI). Compared with existing baselines, several simulations are conducted on practical data sets and the results prove the effectiveness of our algorithm. The development of Connected Automated Vehicle (CAV) technology introduces vehicle connectivity and automation into urban intersection management. It offers powerful means for accurate traffic state perception and effective traffic control actuation. This enabled the development of an intersection control algorithm that included an optimal traffic signal control algorithm and a trajectory planning function. The intersection controller aimed to maximize the intersection throughput while improving the vehicle energy efficiency via implementing adaptive signal phasing and time plans and sending reference trajectories to CAVs. Its effectiveness was tested on a closed test track equipped with a real-time traffic simulation platform, a traffic signal controller, and three physical test vehicles. The test results suggest that the intersection control algorithm was able to improve the average speed of the test vehicles by 9%, although the optimal signal controller or the trajectory planning algorithm alone could only provide marginal speed benefits. This demonstrated the advantage of combining multiple advanced traffic management functions for obtaining an elevated performance increase. For the energy efficiency analysis, both traditional gasoline-engine and hybrid vehicles were used. The hybrid test vehicles obtained fuel savings mostly via the optimal traffic signal controller (e.g., 17% fuel consumption reduction). On the other hand, the gasoline-engine test vehicle’s fuel savings could be largely attributed to the trajectory planning (e.g., 21% fuel consumption reduction). Overall, the proposed intersection controller demonstrated significant vehicle mobility and energy efficiency improvements for vehicles with different powertrains in a nearly realistic traffic condition. Both road users and road administrators are keen to know traffic flow of fine-grained vehicle type. Successful prediction on the traffic flow of heavy, medium and small vehicle could contribute to the improvement of travel safety and efficiency. However, the classification on vehicle type is always not accurate enough using in practice. It could cost a lot to identify from the additional video cameras to cover the full-length of large-scale freeway with high-resolution to capture vehicles clearly. In this paper, empirical data are cleaned, normalized, compensated, filled, decoded and filtered with help of the fusion of vehicle detector data, remote microwave sensors data and toll collection data. The traffic flows of fine-grained heavy, medium and small vehicles are successfully reconstructed. Improved deep belief network (DBN) are then proposed to forecast traffic flow of different types of vehicles in 30-, 60- and 120-minutes time interval. Random-selected road segments on a ring way around a city are trained with data accumulated three months and predict data in the next month. According to prediction error analysis, the proposed method performs better in estimation and forecasting, with respect to the existing methods, especially for longer time prediction and heavy vehicle prediction. It would benefit traffic control to prevent freeway congestion escalation, protect the traffic infrastructure via heavy vehicle control, reduce the road risk, prompt quick emergency response and eventually contributes to more applications for intelligent transportation system (ITS). The accurate and robust prediction of vessel traffic flow is gaining importance in maritime intelligent transportation system (ITS), such as vessel traffic services, maritime spatial planning, and traffic safety management, etc. To achieve fine-grained vessel traffic flow prediction, we will first generate the maritime traffic network (which is essentially a graph), and then propose a graph-driven neural network. In particular, to represent various correlations among spatio-temporal vessel traffic flow, we tend to extract the feature points (i.e., starting, way and ending points) by utilizing the knowledge of vessel positioning data. These feature points are essentially related to the geometrical structures of massive vessel trajectories collected from massive automatic identification system (AIS) records, contributing to the generation of maritime traffic network. We then propose a spatio-temporal multi-graph convolutional network (STMGCN)- based vessel traffic flow prediction method by exploiting multiple types of inherent correlations in the generated maritime graph. The proposed STMGCN mainly contains one spatial multi-graph convolutional layer and two temporal gated convolutional layers, beneficial for extracting spatial and temporal traffic flow patterns. The main benefit of our graph-driven prediction method is that it takes full advantage of the maritime graph and multi-graph learning. Comprehensive experiments have been implemented on realistic AIS dataset to compare our method with several stateof- the-art prediction methods. The fine-grained prediction results have demonstrated our superior performance in terms of both accuracy and robustness. Accurate and reliable traffic forecasting for complicated transportation networks is of vital importance to modern transportation management. The complicated spatial dependencies of roadway links and the dynamic temporal patterns of traffic states make it particularly challenging. To address these challenges, we propose a new capsule network (CapsNet) to extract the spatial features of traffic networks and utilize a nested LSTM (NLSTM) structure to capture the hierarchical temporal dependencies in traffic sequence data. A framework for network-level traffic forecasting is also proposed by sequentially connecting CapsNet and NLSTM. On the basis of literature review, our study is the first to adopt CapsNet and NLSTM in the field of traffic forecasting. An experiment on a Beijing transportation network with 278 links shows that the proposed framework with the capability of capturing complicated spatiotemporal traffic patterns outperforms multiple state-of-the-art traffic forecasting baseline models. The superiority and feasibility of CapsNet and NLSTM are also demonstrated, respectively, by visualizing and quantitatively evaluating the experimental results. The increase in perception capabilities of connected mobile sensor platforms (e.g., self-driving vehicles, drones, and robots) leads to an extensive surge of sensed features at various temporal and spatial scales. Beyond their traditional use for safe operation, available observations could enable to see how and where people move on sidewalks and cycle paths, to eventually obtain a complete microscopic and macroscopic picture of the traffic flows in a larger area. This paper proposes a new method for advanced traffic applications, tracking an unknown and varying number of moving targets (e.g., pedestrians or cyclists) constrained by a road network, using mobile (e.g., vehicles) spatially distributed sensor platforms. The key contribution in this paper is to introduce the concept of network bound targets into the multi-target tracking problem, and hence to derive a network-constrained multi-hypotheses tracker (NC-MHT) to fully utilize the available road information. This is done by introducing a target representation, comprising a traditional target tracking representation and a discrete component placing the target on a given segment in the network. A simulation study shows that the method performs well in comparison to the standard MHT filter in free space. Results particularly highlight network-constraint effects for more efficient target predictions over extended periods of time, and in the simplification of the measurement association process, as compared to not utilizing a network structure. This theoretical work also directs attention to latent privacy concerns for potential applications. Input-output cumulative count curves are a powerful tool to forecast freeway travel times in the very short term, as they rely on the predictive information given by the vehicles’ accumulation in the target section. Therefore, they could represent a very appealing method to feed real-time traffic information systems. However, traffic detectors’ count drift implies very poor accuracy in the estimation of the vehicles’ accumulation, leading to completely unreliable travel time predictions. A drift correction method is necessary. In contrast, several technologies allow accurate direct travel time measurements, like automatic vehicle identification (AVI) or vehicle tracking systems. In all cases, direct travel time measurements are obtained once the vehicle has crossed the target section. This means that the information is representative of the near past traffic conditions, while the objective of real-time information systems is to transmit information about traffic conditions in the near future. In this context, the present paper aims to fuse the information provided by input-output diagrams, obtained from loop detectors, with AVI direct travel time measurements. This fusion allows exploiting the accuracy of the direct measurements to correct the count drift in loop detectors. Then, corrected input-output curves can be used to obtain reliable short-term predictions of travel times. The proposed data fusion method has been applied to a test site in the AP7 freeway near Barcelona, obtaining significantly better results than with the common practices of simply disseminating direct measurements or using spot-speed methods. Reliable traffic flow prediction is of great value in the field of transportation, which, for example, contributes to traffic control and public safety. The key of achieving better performance is to well capture the non-linear spatial-temporal dependency. The state-of-theart works consider both aspects, but they ignore the effect of the global trend on local dynamics and fail to capture long-term dynamic dependencies. In this article, we propose a novel Global-Local Temporal Convolutional Network (GL-TCN) to break through these limitations. Specifically, a novel local temporal convolutional mechanism is proposed to capture the long-term local dynamics effectively. Meanwhile, the global and local flow patterns are integrated to handle the effect of the global flow trend on local dynamics. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to utilize the temporal convolutional network for traffic flow prediction. Experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our method over several state-of-the-art baselines. Traffic flow prediction significantly affects the intelligent transportation for digitized urban transportation management and urban traffic control. Considering the complexity and strong non-linearity shown by traffic flow data, the establishment of model regarding spatial correlations as well as time dynamics can remarkably help to accurately predict traffic flow. A lot of current methods are mainly focused on using the historical time series information of observations to extract sequence features. Such forecasting will cause the lack of information and lead to poor accuracy of the forecast results. Although some studies applied spatial-temporal information, but they are not very accurate. In network-based problems, we would consider the constraint of road networks. Specifically, intersection flows, road speed and travel time are related to road networks. Also, they restrict the long-term prediction of traffic flow. For addressing above issues, a graph multi-head attention neural network (GMHANN) is proposed for the purpose of traffic flow prediction. In design, the GMHANN has an encoder-decoder structure. By the encoder, the data are compressed into a hidden space representation, which, relying on the decoder, is reconstructed as output. Furthermore, we put forward a novel gated recurrent unit (GRU) module (AGRU) based on multi-head attention for the effective extraction of the spatial and temporal features exhibited by traffic flow data. Other state-of-the-art methods are employed for evaluating four public datasets, which reveals that our proposed method outperforms others. Information-sharing between traffic signals and connected vehicles can enhance the traffic conditions in signalized intersections.We propose a straightforward application, heads-up green, with the aim to inform queuing connected vehicles about a switch from red to green. In this way, the drivers’ reaction time is expected to be reduced and the number of vehicles that can pass the intersection during a cycle is thereby increased. Unlike the applications Green Light Optimal Speed Advisory (GLOSA), time-to-green and time-to-red, there is no need for predictions of future traffic signal states. Therefore, heads-up green can be used in traffic actuated and adaptive control strategies in signalized intersections without loss in precision. A simulation-based evaluation of a typical Swedish intersection with a traffic actuated controller is performed to evaluate the traffic performance. The main goal as been to show on the potential to use heads-up green to increase traffic efficiency in signalized intersections. Additionally, different reaction times to the information from heads-up green has been investigated. The results show that with heads-up green it is possible to improve the travel time by up to 15% at high demand levels when queues are frequently observed. The improvements are largest with 100% connected vehicles, but significant improvements of 5-15% are observed also for lower shares of connected vehicles. At high demand levels, travel times are decreased already at small reductions in the reaction time. Hence, there is a potential to improve traffic efficiency already when small changes in reaction time can be achieved with heads-up green. Traffic patterns in the spatiotemporal network are affected by temporal dynamics and spatial correlations. The network flows have different strengths interacting at various implicit layers, and this dynamic process needs to be further explored. Predicting future traffic based on historical data from transportation IoT has been well studied, however, most of the works focus on traffic dynamics in the homogeneous spatial or temporal structure. When the spatiotemporal graph structure turns complex, it becomes a challenge to capture the deep traffic patterns on it. In this paper, a heterogeneous modular flows graph is constructed to characterize the implied spatiotemporal correlations within the traffic data. Then, we proposed a Multilayer Graph Skip Temporal Convolution Network (MGSTCN) which extracts skip aggregated representations of node status to the modular flows graph. And an extended random walk on diverse modular graphs is used to learn the spatial dependencies. The experiments based on real traffic networks confirmed that the MGSTCN has a better performance compared to the spatiotemporal homogeneous methods. Connected and automated vehicle technology via vehicle-to-everything communication, can assist in improving energy efficiency for hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs). In particular, information about the timing of traffic lights and surrounding vehicles can be exchanged between traffic vehicles and in conjunction with vehicle state information, to improve the fuel economy of HEVs significantly. To this end, we propose a multi-lane hierarchical optimization (MLHO) algorithm based on a predictive control framework. The dynamic behaviors of the surrounding vehicles are first predicted, and then the traffic light information (e.g., signal phasing and timing) and vehicles’ state information are utilized in the design. MLHO is a two-level strategy wherein a multi-lane speed planning method for a host vehicle is formulated to plan the optimal speed and lane-change behaviors by considering vehicle power demand, driving comfort, and safety in the upper level. In the lower level, dynamic programming is adopted to devise energy management by tracking the optimal speed. Simulation results under real routes using the traffic simulation software Simulation of Urban Mobility show that the fuel economy of MLHO is improved by 32% on average compared to speed profile driven by a human driver model. In addition, traffic efficiency is enhanced significantly, i.e., different traffic occupancy results on the road indicate that the proposed MLHO is less affected by the traffic flow density. With different traffic densities, the maximum fuel consumption difference under the three considered scenarios is only 0.645L/100km. The imbalance of vehicle supply and demand is a common phenomenon that influences the efficiency of online ride-hailing systems greatly. To address this problem, a three-level hierarchical mixed deep reinforcement learning method (HMDRL) is proposed to reposition idle vehicles. A manager operates at the top level, where action-abstraction is conducted from the time dimension and is adaptive for spatially scalable and time-varying systems. Coordinators locate at the middle level and a parallel coordination mechanism that is independent of the decision order is designed to improve the efficiency of the repositioning. The bottom level is composed of executive workers to reposition vehicles with mixed states and the states contain spatiotemporal information of agents’ neighbor areas. Two reward functions are designed for the manager and the coordinators, respectively, aiming to improve the training effect by avoiding sparse rewards. A simulator based on real orders is designed and HMDRL is compared with six methods. Experimental results demonstrate that HMDRL outperforms all the other methods. In three comparison experiments, the order response rate is increased by 0.62% to 8.29%, 1.5% to 7.78%, 1.18% to 4.75%, respectively. This paper studies the traffic delay prediction modeling for multiple signalized intersections along the Ala Moana Boulevard and Nimitz Highway in Hawaii. Several machine learning (ML) based approaches have been studied in the literature, and most of them focused on prediction accuracy rather than the end use of real-time control and implementation. These ML models tend to be very complex and non-linear in nature, making it challenging to achieve fast inferences and are computationally heavy for real-time signal control implementation. In this paper, a simple yet accurate hybrid modeling method is proposed to predict traffic delay one-step ahead with the model made suitable for real-time implementation to control traffic flow. Since real-time road-side measurements are recorded in unstructured form, the paper also discusses other issues related to data extraction and the pre-processing process. Finally, a simple signal control loop is developed to demonstrate the proposed modeling approach, which has shown advantages in model accuracy and computation efficiency compared against several existing modeling methods. Aiming at improving the operation of the bottleneck area of the highway in the environment of a connected and automated vehicle, this paper proposes an integrated lane-level control (ILC) method by combining the variable speed limit control method and lane selection method into a comprehensive framework. A lane-level variable speed limit (LVSL) control method is proposed for the mixed traffic flow based on a deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm. Then, a lane-level short-term traffic prediction (LSTP) model based on hybrid deep learning is built to forecast the traffic state in a next control horizon. Finally, a lane selection method using a dynamic programming algorithm is established for the connected automated vehicle (CAV) to look for the optimal lane-level route by considering the estimated traffic speeds and limit speeds from LSTP and LVSL respectively. Comprehensive simulation-based evaluation experiments were conducted in various scenarios e.g., with different traffic demands, penetration rates of CAVs, length of control horizons, and the number of lanes. The evaluation results reveal that the proposed LSTP model outperforms the state-of-the-art traffic prediction models in terms of accuracy and stability. In addition, the proposed ILC method is capable of improving the traffic operation of the bottleneck efficiently by synthetically taking the advantage of the LVSL method and lane selection method. Compared with the no-control strategies, the ILC method can reduce total travel time by more than 30% in various traffic scenarios. Connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) can improve traffic safety and transportation network efficiency while also reducing environmental impacts. However, congestion and accidents can easily occur at merging roadways. Therefore, coordinating cooperative merging of CAVs is one of the most common traffic management problems. This paper addresses the problem of integrated longitudinal and lateral cooperative merging control with practical implications for CAVs approaching on-ramps. A hierarchical and decentralized cooperative coordination framework was developed to systematically control the merging of CAVs. The control system of each vehicle can be divided into an upper-level and lower-level. For upper-level control, an optimal control-based algorithm considering input constraints was presented to optimize fuel consumption and passenger comfort. A decision strategy was developed to optimize the start time of lateral trajectory planning. To achieve lowerlevel control, a Proportional-Integral (PI) controller was used for tracking the optimized longitudinal speed of the upper-level and a decentralized unified algorithm based on nonlinear model predictive control was proposed for tracking the upper-level optimal trajectory. To avoid lateral collision, the driving safety field based on vehicle size and motion state was selected as one of tracking the optimization objectives. Efficiency of the proposed framework and the algorithm was validated by CarSim/Simulink co-simulations of near-real-world vehicle scenarios. The proposed integrated merging control system can improve traffic efficiency and reduce fuel consumption compared to baseline with the potential for real-world application. Furthermore, the results demonstrate the potential applicability of cooperative control methods based on upper-level vehicle control. Vehicle platoons (VPs) are groups of vehicles driving together with a short inter-vehicle gap and a harmonized velocity. For a long period, the VPs and human-driven vehicles (HDVs) will coexist in mixed traffic flow, where the cut-in maneuver of the HDVs towards the VPs can be frequently expected. In this paper, to handle such cut-ins, we propose an intention prediction-based control method for the VPs by considering the tradeoff between the platoon integrity and traffic safety. Particularly, the proposed method is designed to prevent as many cut-ins as possible while taking care of the road safety. It consists of a cut-in prediction part, including intention and trajectory prediction algorithms, and a finite state machine (FSM)-based predictive control part, including a high-level FSM and a low-level predictive control. Driver-in-the-loop experiments were conducted in the VP-based driving scenarios to train the intention prediction algorithm and test the proposed method. We show the results detailing the control behavior of the proposed method in a no cut-in test, a mandatory cut-in test, and three discretionary cut-in tests. The results demonstrate that the proposed method can predict the cutin intention of human drivers in real time. Besides, according to the prediction results, the proposed method can prevent cut-ins for the VPs while taking care of the road safety. Efficient intersection planning is one of the most challenging tasks for an autonomous vehicle at present. Politeness to other traffic participants and reaction to surrounding information are the key aspects that determine the performance of planning algorithm for an autonomous vehicle. In order to capture these aspects, we propose a planning framework, based on the partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), to ensure social compliance and optimize the motion response of autonomous vehicles. The framework designs a novel POMDP model to ensure effective prediction of behavioral intentions and decision-making at intersections with no traffic signs and low traffic volume. Then, a deterministic planner is employed as the baseline to realize planning. Specifically, we consider both the driving position and the facing angle of the vehicle in real-world situations. At the same time, we utilize scattering methods for probability updating and intent determination to improve the algorithm’s adaptability to real-world scenarios. The proposed framework is evaluated in different scenarios to demonstrate its capabilities in terms of the interactive planning for an autonomous vehicle. This paper proposes Koopman operator theory and the related algorithm dynamical mode decomposition (DMD) for analysis and control of signalized traffic flow networks. DMD provides a model-free approach for representing complex oscillatory dynamics from measured data, and we study its application to several problems in signalized traffic.We first study a single signalized intersection, and we propose applying this method to infer traffic signal control parameters such as phase timing directly from traffic flow data. Next, we propose using the oscillatory modes of the Koopman operator, approximated with DMD, for early identification of unstable queue growth that has the potential to cause cascading congestion. Then we demonstrate how DMD can be coupled with knowledge of the traffic signal control status to determine traffic signal control parameters that are able to reduce queue lengths. Lastly, we demonstrate that DMD allows for determining the structure and the strength of interactions in a network of signalized intersections. All examples are demonstrated using a case study network instrumented with high resolution traffic flow sensors. Traffic forecasting has attracted considerable attention due to its importance in proactive urban traffic control and management. Scholars and engineers have exerted considerable efforts in improving the performance of traffic forecasting algorithms in terms of accuracy, reliability, and efficiency. Spatial feature representation of traffic flow is a core component that greatly influences traffic forecasting performance. In previous studies, several spatial attributes of traffic flow are ignored due to the following issues: a) traffic flow propagation does not comply with the road network, b) the spatial pattern of traffic flow varies over time, and c) single adjacent matrix cannot handle the complex and hierarchical urban traffic flow. To address the abovementioned issues, this study proposes a novel traffic forecasting algorithm called traffic transformer, which achieves great success in natural language processing. The multihead attention mechanism and stacking layers enable the transformer to learn dynamic and hierarchical features in sequential data. Two components, namely, global encoder and global–local decoder, are proposed to extract and fuse the spatial patterns globally and locally. Experimental results indicate that the proposed traffic transformer outperforms state-of-theart methods. The learned dynamic and hierarchical features of traffic flow can help achieve a better understanding of spatial dependency of traffic flow for effective and efficient traffic control and management strategies. Automated driving systems need to behave as human-like as possible, especially in highly interactive scenarios. In this way, the behavior can be better interpreted and predicted by other traffic participants, in order to prevent misunderstanding, and in the worst case, accidents. With this purpose, more and more human-driven trajectories in real traffic are recorded, making it possible to learn human-like driving styles. In this paper, we extend our previous behavior cloning approach, which has been successfully applied to highway driving, to generate high-level decisions for unsignalized intersections that are challenging during urban driving. Unlike many other approaches that utilize neural networks, either for end-to-end behavior cloning or for approximating Q-functions in reinforcement learning, where their decisions are intractable to understand, the output decisions of our approach are interpretable and easy to track. Meanwhile, the driving decisions are provably safe under reasonable assumptions by generalizing the Responsibility-Sensitive Safety (RSS) concept to complex intersections. Simulation evaluations show that our learned policy produces a more human-like behavior, and meanwhile, balances driving efficiency, comfort, perceived safety, and politeness better. Trajectory prediction is a fundamental problem and challenge for autonomous vehicles. Early works mainly focused on designing complicated architectures for deep-learning-based prediction models in normal-illumination environments, which fail in dealing with low-light conditions. The paper proposes a novel approach for trajectory prediction in low-illumination scenarios by leveraging multi-stream information fusion, which integrates image, optical flow, and object trajectory information. This is achieved by applying Convolutional Neural Networkbased (CNN) Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) networks to extract temporal information from the image channel, Spatial- Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (ST-GCN) to model relative motion between adjacent camera frames through the optical flow channel, and recognizing high-level interactions between vehicles in the trajectory channel. Further, to investigate the reliability of the model in low-illumination scenarios, epistemic uncertainty estimation is conducted by applying Monte Carlo Dropout. The proposed approach is validated on HEV-I and newly generated Dark-HEV-I datasets focusing on graph-based interaction understanding and low illumination conditions. The experimental results show improved performance compared to baselines in both standard and low-illumination scenarios. Importantly, our approach is generic and applicable to scenarios with different types of perception data. The source code is available at https://github.com/TommyGong08/MSIF. Accurate traffic flow prediction is becoming increasingly important for transportation planning, control, management, and information services of successful. Numerous existing models focus on short-term traffic forecasts, but effective long-term forecasting of traffic flows have become a challenging issue in recent years. To solve this problem, this paper proposes a deep learning architecture which consisting of two parts: the long short-term memory encoder-decoder structure at the bottom and the calibration layer at the top. In the encoder-decoder model, we propose an hard attention mechanism based on learning similar patterns to enhance neuronal memory and reduce the accumulation of error propagation. To correct some of the missing details, we design a control gate in the calibration layer to learn the predicted data in groups according to different forms. The proposed method is evaluated on real-world datasets and compared with other state-of-the-art methods. It is verified that our model can accurately learn local feature and long-term dependence, and has better accuracy and stability in long-term sequence prediction. Urban Rail Transit Systems (URTS) have increasingly become the backbone of modern public transportation, attributed to their unparalleled convenience, high efficiency, and commitment to sustainable green energy. As we witness a global resurgence of urban rail transit, it becomes evident that most existing URTS still operate on a level of suboptimal intelligence, with their operation and maintenance methods lagging behind other advanced urban transit systems. URTS generate considerable data, offering substantial opportunities for service quality enhancements. Machine Learning (ML), with its demonstrated proficiency in extracting valuable insights from vast data, hold significant promise in the quest to empower URTS. This survey presents a comprehensive exploration of the potential application of ML in URTS. Initially, we delve into the existing challenges of URTS, thereby elucidating the compelling motivation behind the integration of ML into these systems. We then propose a taxonomy of ML paradigms and techniques, discussing in-depth their potential applications in URTS, encompassing perception, prediction, and optimization tasks. Subsequently, we scrutinize a plethora of ML-empowered URTS application scenarios, including but not limited to obstacle perception, infrastructure perception, communication and cybersecurity perception, passenger flow prediction, train delay prediction, fault prediction, remaining useful life (RUL) prediction, train operation and control optimization, train dispatch optimization, and train ground communication optimization. Finally, we present an insightful discussion on the challenges and future directions for URTS, aiming to harness the full potential of ML techniques to deliver superior service and performance. Traffic analysis is crucial for urban operations and planning, while the availability of dense urban traffic data beyond loop detectors is still scarce. We present a large-scale floating vehicle dataset of per-street segment traffic information, Metropolitan Segment Traffic Speeds from Massive Floating Car Data in 10 Cities (MeTS-10), available for 10 global cities with a 15-minute resolution for collection periods ranging between 108 and 361 days in 2019–2021 and covering more than 1500 square kilometers per metropolitan area. MeTS-10 features traffic speed information at all street levels from main arterials to local streets for Antwerp, Bangkok, Barcelona, Berlin, Chicago, Istanbul, London, Madrid, Melbourne, and Moscow. The dataset leverages the industrial-scale floating vehicle Traffic4cast data with speeds and vehicle counts provided in a privacy-preserving spatio-temporal aggregation. We detail the efficient matching approach mapping the data to the OpenStreetMap (OSM) road graph. We evaluate the dataset by comparing it with publicly available stationary vehicle detector data (for Berlin, London, and Madrid) and the Uber traffic speed dataset (for Barcelona, Berlin, and London). The comparison highlights the differences across datasets in spatio-temporal coverage and variations in the reported traffic caused by the binning method. MeTS-10 enables novel, city-wide analysis of mobility and traffic patterns for ten major world cities, overcoming current limitations of spatially sparse vehicle detector data. The large spatial and temporal coverage offers an opportunity for joining the MeTS-10 with other datasets, such as traffic surveys in traffic planning studies or vehicle detector data in traffic control settings. Taxi demand prediction is valuable for the decisionmaking of online taxi-hailing platforms. Data-driven deep learning approaches have been widely utilized in this area, and many complex spatiotemporal characteristics of taxi demand have been studied. However, the heterogeneity of demand patterns among different taxi zones has not been taken into account. To this end, this paper explores zone clustering and how to utilize the inter-zone heterogeneity to improve the prediction. First, based on the pairwise clustering theory, a taxi zone clustering algorithm is designed by considering the correlations among different taxi zones. Then, both the cluster-level and the global-level prediction modules are developed to extract intraand inter-cluster characteristics, respectively. Finally, a Multi- Level Recurrent Neural Networks (MLRNN) model is proposed by combining the two modules. Experiments on two taxi trip records datasets from New York City demonstrate that our model improves the prediction accuracy compared with other state-ofthe- art methods. For a long period, automated vehicles (AVs) or vehicle platoons will coexist with human-driven vehicles (HDVs) in heterogeneous traffic flow, where the cut-in maneuver of human drivers can be frequently expected. In this paper, to understand and simulate the driver decisions on whether to continue the cut-in and when to execute the lane-change during the cutin process, we propose a two-layer prediction-based decision model by integrating a dynamic prediction module, a continuity decision module, and an execution decision module. To our best knowledge, this is the first study to model the driver decision behavior of the cut-in process. Cut-in experiments are conducted to collect the decision and control data of drivers under one- and two-target-vehicle scenarios, which both include sixty sub-scenarios with different initial velocities, accelerations, or positions of the vehicles. We prove the effectiveness of the proposed model in simulating the driver decision behavior of the cut-in process by comparing the experimental and simulation results under various scenarios over different subjects. Besides, we analyze the effects of some model parameters on the model performance to show their ability to represent different driving styles. A vehicle platoon is a group of vehicles driving together with a harmonized speed and a short inter-vehicle gap by using vehicle automation and vehicle-to-vehicle communication. Platoons have to share road with human-driven vehicles (HDVs) and can only be applied in heterogeneous traffic flow for a long period. Driver cut-in behavior (DCB) towards a platoon can be frequently expected in such driving context. In this paper, to understand and simulate such behavior, we propose a platoonoriented cut-in behavior (POCB) model by fusing a lateral and a longitudinal control model into the queuing network (QN) cognitive architecture. Platoon-oriented cut-in experiments are conducted to collect driver data under cut-in from back and front scenarios, which both include six sub-scenarios with different platoon gaps or initial velocities.We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model in simulating the DCB towards platoons by comparing experimental and simulation results under various driving scenarios across different subjects. In the context of pro-active traffic management, real-time crash risk evaluation is one of the most critical components. Signalized intersections are well-known high-risk locations because of the variety of traffic movements, modes, and their interactions. Unlike access-controlled freeways, the traffic flow at signalized intersections presents cyclical characteristics, which are temporally separated by traffic signals. Therefore, the data preparation for real-time crash risk prediction at signalized intersections should be based on the signal cycle rather than a predefined fixed time interval (e.g., 5 minutes). In this research, the corresponding signal cycles where crashes occurred were verified based on high-resolution event-based data (i.e., Automated Traffic Signal Performance Measures (ATSPM)). Six types of real-time cycle-level factors were considered, including traffic volume, signal timing, headway and occupancy, traffic variation between upstream and downstream detectors, shockwave characteristics, and weather. Two undersampling strategies, matched case-control and random undersampling, were utilized to develop conditional logistic and binary logistic models, respectively. Model results indicate that the random undersampling performs better than the matched case-control method. It was found that higher cycle volume, overall average flow ratio across lanes, arrivals on yellow ratio, traffic volatility across approach sections, as well as longer cycle length and lower green ratio could significantly increase the odds of crash occurrence at signalized intersections. Moreover, longer maximum queue length, bigger shockwave, and higher absolute queuing shockwave speed tend to increase the odds of crash occurrence. Understanding human drivers’ intentions and predicting their future motions are significant to connected and autonomous vehicles and traffic safety and surveillance systems. Predicting multimodal vehicular trajectories at urban unsignalized intersections remains challenging due to dynamic traffic flow and uncertainty of human drivers’ maneuvers. In this paper, we propose a comprehensive trajectory prediction framework that combines a multimodal trajectory generation network with inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) and risk aversion (RA) modules. Specifically, we first construct a multimodal spatialtemporal Transformer network (mmSTTN) to generate multiple trajectory candidates, using trajectory coordinates as inputs. Accounting for spatio-temporal features, we formulate the IRL reward function for evaluating all candidate trajectories. The optimal trajectory is then selected based on the computed rewards, a process that mimics human drivers’ decision-making. We further develop the RA module based on the driving risk field for optimal risk-averse trajectory prediction. We conduct experiments and ablation studies using the inD dataset at an urban unsignalized intersection, demonstrating impressive human trajectory alignment, prediction accuracy, and the ability to generate risk-averse trajectories. Our proposed framework reduces prediction errors and driving risks by 25% and 30% compared to baseline methods. Results validate vehicles’ humanlike risk-averse diverging-and-concentrating behavior as they traverse the intersection. The proposed framework presents a novel approach for forecasting multimodal vehicular trajectories by imitating human drivers and incorporating physics-based risk information derived from the driving field. This research offers a promising direction for enhancing the safety and efficiency of connected and autonomous vehicles navigating urban environments. Reasonable planning of passenger evacuation routes can directly improve evacuation efficiency in the metro station. Considering the effect of traffic capacity at the node such as gate and stair/escalator, a multi-objective optimization model aimed at minimizing the maximum evacuation time of heterogeneous passengers in different segmentation areas is established, which achieves local optimization on the basis of global optimization of the evacuation route. Node traffic capacity is assessed based on the combination of BP neural network and atomic orbital search algorithm, which is conducive to improving the calculation accuracy of total evacuation time. The simulation results indicate that the performance of the established prediction model of node travel time is good, and the mean square error can be as low as 0.2555. Meanwhile, the proposed route strategy can improve the overall evacuation efficiency by 21.85%, and passengers’ choices of evacuation routes are more reasonable. The sensitivity analysis of factors affecting evacuation through a random forest algorithm shows that the number of passengers with person attribute E has the greatest impact on evacuation time, which should be the focus of attention in the evacuation process. Obtaining future traffic state evolution information is critical to traffic control algorithms design and further to intelligent transportation systems. However, accurately predicting traffic state evolution is not an easy task, although the traffic prediction-related study attracted a lot of attention. This study develops a macroscopic traffic flow model-integrated deep learning framework (MTFD) for the high-resolution temporal-spatial traffic state dynamic propagation on a road network, integrating temporal-spatial traffic dependency, traffic flow theory, and data analysis techniques. First, traffic state propagation on every road section is mathematically described by the CTM model given traffic initial and boundary conditions. Next, a temporal-spatial traffic dependency attention (TSTD) recurrent neural network is developed to predict boundary conditions factoring the traffic temporal-spatial dependency. Also, this paper develops a graph theory-based method to capture the temporal-spatial traffic dependency among the traffic on neighboring road sections. Last, the extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is introduced to adjust the predicted traffic state at an intersection to satisfy the conservation law. The numerical experiments illustrate that the proposed method predicts the traffic state evolution in a freeway network within 30 minutes with accuracy varying from 75%-95%. It has a better performance compared to the tested baseline models (APTN, Graph CNN-LSTM, and so on). The experimental results also illustrate that factoring traffic dependency and integrating data assimilation techniques can improve prediction accuracy. This paper presents an innovative method to adaptively optimize traffic signal plans based on the estimation of traffic situation achieved from the information of various penetration rates of Connected Vehicles (CVs). The network-wide signal control problem is formulated as a linear optimization problem. Moreover, we develop a Kalman filter (KF) and Neural Network (NN) algorithms to predict and update the traffic situation under mixed non-connected and connected vehicles environment. To capture the dynamic of the traffic flow, we employ the cell transmission model synched with the Vissim traffic simulator. The methodology is tested using a challenging network of six intersections. We test our model for various Penetration Rates (PR) of the CV to provide a comparative analysis. The performance of the method is also compared with a conventional actuated-coordinated traffic signal plan. The results show that with a bare minimum PR (say more than 30%), our proposed methodology outperforms the actuated traffic signal plan. (note that the minimum PR is subject to further ongoing research in the literature, to the extent that lower PRs might be plausible). Though a 100% PR is highly desirable, our method can fetch the maximum benefit just by 60% PR. High-speed highway on-ramp merging is a significant challenge toward realizing fully automated driving (level 4). Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs), that combine communication and autonomous driving technologies, may improve greatly the safety performances when performing highway on-ramp merging. However, even with the emergence of CAVs, some keys constraints should be considered to achieve a safe on-ramp merging. First, human-driven vehicles will still be present on the road, and it may take decades before all the commercialized vehicles will be fully autonomous and connected. Also, onboard vehicle sensors may provide inaccurate or incomplete data due to sensors limitations and blind spots, especially in such critical situations. To resolve these issues, the present work introduces a novel solution that uses an off-board Road-Side Unit (RSU) to realize fully automated highway on-ramp merging for connected and automated vehicles. Our proposed approach is based on an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to predict drivers’ intentions. This prediction is used as an input state to a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agent that outputs the longitudinal acceleration for the merging vehicle. To achieve this, we first propose a data-driven model that can predict the behavior of the humandriven vehicles in the main highway lane, with 99% accuracy. We use the output of this model as input state to train a Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (TD3) agent that learns “safe” and “cooperative” driving policy to perform highway on-ramp merging. We show that our proposed decisionmaking strategy improves performance compared to the solutions proposed previously. This paper tackles the optimal traffic signal control of isolated oversaturated intersections. An analytical signal control algorithm is proposed to find the global optimal signal timings with dynamic cycle lengths and phase splits to minimize the vehicle delay throughout the oversaturation period at a generic multi-phase junction. The traffic dynamics are modelled based on the kinematic wave theory and the predicted traffic flows. Moreover, spillback avoidance is incorporated during the queue formation oversaturated regime by adopting a mixed delay and probability of spillback objective function. Microsimulation experiments demonstrate the optimality, practicality, and robustness to system uncertainties of the proposed signal control method. The results pinpoint over 63%, 55%, and 40% reduction in total vehicle delay by implementing the proposed signal control respectively compared to an optimal fixed-time, actuated, and capacity-aware max pressure signal control methods. In the era of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles, platooning has the potential to increase roadway capacity and reduce energy consumption. However, as vehicles try to form platoons they may also expend extra energy. Also, depending on its position within a platoon, the energy savings of each vehicle can be different. Thus, optimizing and quantifying the savings that may be gained from platooning is challenging. In this paper, we develop a simulation-optimization framework to tackle this challenge of quantifying energy savings from platooning. Our optimization model determines vehicle-to-platoon assignments given the current location, speed, and destination of all the vehicles and platoons on the freeway. The simulation model takes these platooning decisions from the optimization model and implements them. Vissim is used to simulate the actions taken by all the vehicles and platoons and capture the energy expended by each vehicle over its entire trip duration. To quantify the energy savings, the system is simulated with and without platooning. That is, the optimization model is turned off when assessing the performance of the system without platooning. In addition to the simulation-optimization framework, an accurate energy consumption model is developed in this paper, which is inspired by the work of Tadakuma and colleagues. The energy consumption model utilizes a hybrid prediction formula for aerodynamic drag reduction in multi-vehicle formations unifying both physical mechanisms and existing empirical study data. Our results show that a system wide savings of about 3% can be realized over 160 kilometers when platoons are formed strategically. Rapid development of AI technologies has propelled the seamless integration of physical and cyber worlds with various kinds of online/offline information collected from millions of multimodal sensing systems. The complexity, diversity and uncertainty inherited in such systems, such as Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs), have gone far beyond human capacity of managing and controlling. Our team is among the first to propose the idea of utilizing the nearly unlimited computational resources in cyberspace to construct a bottom-up and top-down combined artificial ITSs for testing, experimenting, representation, verification, and validation of physical ITSs. Especially, the parallel transportation has been developed for safer, smarter, greener, and more reliable transportation services. After three decades of research and field studies, the DeCAST in Transverse, i.e., Decentralized/Distributed Autonomous Operations/ Organizations (DAO) in transportation systems, has been envisioned. In this paper, we introduce its architecture, operational processes, software and hardware platforms, and real world applications. Specifically, a transportation foundation model driven by artificial transportation systems, parallel learning and federated intelligence, named TengYun, is outlined for DeCAST. Conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles are one of the common safety issues at signalized intersections. Pedestrian Flashing GREEN (FG), a time interval for pedestrians on crosswalks to safely finish crossing before the next phase occurs, may fail to clear the crosswalk in the allotted time, due to significant pedestrian non-compliant behavior. In this manner, probability of pedestrian-vehicle exposures increases when non-compatible vehicle flows are released at the next immediate phase. This paper seeks to address this issue by presenting a traffic signal control strategy for urban traffic networks that aims to minimize vehicle traveling delay (increase efficiency) as well as pedestrian crossing risk (increase safety). First, a macroscopic model for pedestrian-vehicle mixed-flow networks is proposed. Considering the high-incidence rate of pedestrian violations during FG, an additional Dynamic All RED (DAR) phase is introduced at the end of each FG period, whose duration is adaptively adjusted according to the number of non-compliant pedestrians. With computational complexity being a concern for our model, an evolutionary algorithm with repairing mechanism (EARM), is proposed to solve our problem. Case studies are provided to illustrate the potential impact of the pedestrian movement to the vehicle traffic networks when pedestrian safety is considered in the system, as well as the efficacy of our traffic light control strategy for pedestrians and vehicles on risk reduction. With the deterioration of the transportation ecosystem and traffic congestion, traffic graph representations become more complex and lack intelligibility. The deep learning method provides a new way for traffic prediction by mining the spatiotemporal relations of historical states in traffic network. Recurrent neural networks based on gate control can avoid the gradient vanishing and graph convolutional networks provide theoretical support for spatial feature extraction of traffic graph. However, in the prediction of traffic evolution behaviors, the statuses of units and groups distributed in the traffic network have strong and continuous spatiotemporal correlations. Modeling only based on the temporal or spatial perspective usually lacks comprehensiveness and semantic relevance which results in poor prediction performance. In this paper, we propose a spatiotemporal hierarchical propagation graph convolutional network(SHPGCN) to get the whole spatiotemporal evolution features of traffic graph, which can be used to predict the propagation effects and state changes of traffic flow. Considered the inadequacy of graph convolution in the learning of hierarchical features, we construct a low-dimensional propagation graph representation that projects complex node relationships into first-order neighborhoods to capture dynamic changes at different spatial and temporal scales. The SHPGCN uses graph convolution to encode the traffic propagation features and embeds them into a bidirectional recurrent sequence for traffic prediction. The experiment results show that SHPGCN can provide good prediction accuracy and robustness for the traffic evolution behaviors. Cooperative intelligent and autonomous transportation systems rely on intelligent sensing, computing, and actuating technologies for unmanned freight and public movements. The information gained from neighbors and communication infrastructures provides efficient actuation for safe and sustained transportation. This article resolves traffic data management congestion using sixth-generation (6G) communication and computing techniques. Terahertz and machine-type communications are exploited for swift information exchange, bypassing the congestion effects. Congestion occurs when demand for road space exceeds supply. This proposal incorporates prediction-based learning to compute the feasibility of handling traffic information and cooperative intelligent transportation. This model is named Congestion-aware Pre-predictive Data Allocation (CPPDA). The traffic flows causing congestion in the data exchange process are predicted for re-allocation and independent channel utilization. In this learning, the pre-predicted instances are updated with the actual identified utilization-to-congestion rate. Therefore, the congestion-causing channels for sensing are identified with ease, reducing the outage. The outage is examined for a basic intervehicle data link. Through the optimal allocation of channels for actuation, cloud-aided resources are utilized to a maximum level, leveraging infrastructure support. In addition to an outage of 10.83%, the response time of 14.75%, congestion factor of 8.2%, computational overhead of 6.4%, and information gain factors of 6.86% are analyzed through a comparative study. This work proposes a novel uncertainty quantification framework for long-term traffic flow prediction (TFP) based on a sequential deep learning model. Quantifying the uncertainty of TFP is crucial for intelligent transportation system (ITS) to make robust traffic congestion analysis and efficient traffic management due to the inherent uncertain and fluctuating nature of traffic flow. However, the performance (e.g., reliability and sharpness) of uncertainty quantification is hard to guarantee, particularly for long-term traffic flow (e.g., one week or two weeks in advance). To this end, this work develops a nonparametric performance-oriented prediction interval (PI) construction approach based on an enhanced sequential convolutional long short-term memory units (ConvLSTM) model, which is named as PI-ConvLSTM. This model can well learn the temporal correlations involved in the multivariate explanatory samples. Specifically, a periodic pattern learning strategy and a performance-oriented loss function are developed to ensure the quality of the derived PIs. Through validating on the real-life England freeway traffic flow dataset, the proposed PI-ConvLSTM proves to be capable of producing the skillful PIs for longterm TFP. For instance, the performance of derived PIs for two-week ahead is 0.175%, 0.198 and 1957.127 in average in terms of reliability, average width and sharpness, respectively. As compared to the benchmark models the proposed model shows at least 68.1% improvement on reliability, 3.4% on average width and 1.7% on sharpness. Intersection is one of the most accident-prone urban scenarios for autonomous driving wherein making safe and computationally efficient decisions is non-trivial. Current research mainly focuses on the simplified traffic conditions while ignoring the existence of mixed traffic flows, i.e., vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians. For urban roads, different participants lead to a quite dynamic and complex interaction, posing great difficulty to learn an intelligent policy. This paper develops the dynamic permutation state representation in the framework of integrated decision and control (IDC) to handle signalized intersections with mixed traffic flows. Specially, this representation introduces an encoding function and summation operator to construct driving states from environmental observation, capable of dealing with different types and variant number of traffic participants. A constrained optimal control problem is built wherein the objective involves tracking performance and the constraints for different participants, roads and signal lights are designed respectively to assure safety. We solve this problem by gradient-based optimization, wherein the reasonable state will be given by the encoding function and then served as the input of policy and value function. An off-policy training is designed to reuse observations from driving environment and backpropagation through time is utilized to update the policy function and encoding function jointly. Verification result shows that the dynamic permutation state representation can enhance the driving performance of IDC, including comfort, decision compliance and safety with a large margin. The trained driving policy can realize efficient and smooth passing in the complex intersection, guaranteeing driving intelligence and safety simultaneously. Short-term estimation and prediction of pedestrian density in urban hot spots (e.g., railway station, shopping mall, etc.) is an important topic for traffic management and control in densely populated areas. In this paper, we propose a short-term pedestrian density estimation and prediction method based on mobile phone data. Firstly, pedestrian density in hot spots is estimated using mobile phone data. To decrease the positioning errors of mobile phone data, a modified particle filter method, which considers the movements of pedestrians, is applied for pre-processing the data. An efficient spatial access method (i.e., Hilbert R-tree) is adopted to construct pedestrians’ position indexes for realizing the short-term estimation. Secondly, based on the estimation results, the spatiotemporal extended Kalman filter (SEKF) is proposed for the short-term prediction of pedestrian density. A massive mobile phone dataset collected in Nanjing, China is used in the case study. The estimated pedestrian density from Monday to Thursday is used for pedestrian density prediction on Friday. The results show that the proposed method can estimate and predict pedestrian density in hot spots, especially in small-scale sites of hot spots efficiently in a short time. Comparing with classical prediction methods, the proposed SEKF method predicts short-term pedestrian density in urban hot spots more accurately. Traffic flow (TF) prediction is an important and yet a challenging task in transportation systems, since the TF involves high nonlinearities and is affected by many elements. Recently, neural networks have attracted much attention for TF prediction, but they are commonly black boxes with complex architectures and difficult to be interpreted, e.g., the contributions of specific traffic elements are not explicit, hardly providing informative guidance. In this paper, we aim at addressing more interpretable short-term TF prediction with joint consideration to high accuracy, and thus introduces a pragmatic method by applying the efficient hinging hyperplanes neural network (EHHNN) simply built upon sparse neuron connections. In the proposed method, different traffic factors are incorporated into the inputs, including their spatial-temporal information. Besides the pursuit of accuracy, we further extend the ANOVA decomposition of EHHNNs to the interpretation analysis with specifications to traffic data, in which the contributions concerning specific traffic variables are detected quantitatively. As such, the proposed method firstly applies the EHHNN to filter out more important traffic variables for dimensionality reduction while maintaining accurate prediction. Then, variable interpretation analysis is performed from different perspectives, e.g. to quantitatively investigate the influence of traffic factors and also their spatialtemporal impacts. Therefore, a predictor and an analyzing tool can both be attained for the TF by exerting the flexibility and extending the interpretability of EHHNNs, which is promising to provide informative guidance to future traffic control. Numerical experiments verify the effectiveness and potential of the proposed method in TF prediction and analysis. This article presents the design, implementation, and use cases of the Chattanooga Digital Twin (CTwin) towards the vision for next-generation smart city applications for urban mobility management. CTwin is an end-to-end web-based platform that incorporates various aspects of the decision-making process for optimizing urban transportation systems in Chattanooga, Tennessee, to reduce traffic congestion, incidents, and vehicle fuel consumption. The platform serves as a cyberinfrastructure to collect and integrate multi-domain urban mobility data from various online repositories and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, covering multiple urban aspects (e.g., traffic, natural hazards, weather, and safety) that are relevant to urban mobility management. The platform enables advanced capabilities for: (a) real-time situational awareness on traffic and infrastructure conditions on highways and urban roads, (b) cyber-physical control for optimizing traffic signal timing, and (c) interactive visual analytics on big urban mobility data and various metrics for traffic prediction and transportation performance evaluation. The platform is designed using a multi-level componentization paradigm and is implemented using modular and adaptive architecture, rendering it as a generalizable and extendable prototype for other urban management applications. We present several use cases to demonstrate CTwin’s core capabilities for supporting decision-making in smart urban mobility management. When dealing with traffic big data under the background of Internet of Things (IoT), traffic control under the single-machine computing environment is difficult to adapt to the massive and rapid analysis and decision-making. To tackle this problem, we propose a parallel computing approach of traffic network flow control based on the mechanism of model predictive control (MPC). A non-analytical rule-based traffic flow model is developed to forecast vehicle movements in the prediction horizon according to the real-time feedback information of traffic flow, and evaluate the performances of candidate control strategies. Furthermore, to accelerate the solution process of obtaining the optimal control schemes in the prediction horizon, a two-level hierarchical parallel genetic algorithm (HPGA) based on Spark cloud computing is designed. Through the parallel computing architecture, the computationally intensive optimization tasks are decomposed into multiple parallel sub-tasks with the aid of resilient distributed datasets (RDDs), which improves the computational efficiency. The simulation results demonstrate the validity of the proposed methodology for traffic network flow predictive control with respect to unsaturated and oversaturated traffic scenarios. The Spark-based parallel optimization approach has the potential to satisfy the computing requirements of online optimization when dealing with the big data of traffic network flow control while keeps favorable control performances. Accurate traffic speed prediction is crucial for the guidance and management of urban traffic, which at the same time requires a model with a satisfactory computational burden and memory space in applications. In this paper, we propose a factorized Spatial-Temporal Tensor Graph Convolutional Network for traffic speed prediction. Traffic networks are modeled and unified into a graph tensor that integrates spatial and temporal information simultaneously.We extend graph convolution into tensor space and propose a tensor graph convolution network to extract more discriminating features from spatial-temporal graph data. We further introduce Tucker decomposition and derive a factorized tensor convolution to reduce the computational burden, which performs separate filtering in small-scale space, time, and feature modes. Besides, we can benefit from noise suppression of traffic data when discarding those trivial components in the process of tensor decomposition. Extensive experiments on the three real-world datasets demonstrate that our method is more effective than traditional prediction methods, and achieves stateof- the-art performance. Accurate spatial-temporal traffic flow forecasting is essential for helping traffic managers take control measures and drivers to choose the optimal travel routes. Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been widely used in traffic flow prediction owing to their powerful ability to capture spatialtemporal dependencies. However, designing the spatial-temporal graph adjacency matrix, which is essential to the success of GCNs remains an open question. This paper proposes a GCNbased traffic flow forecasting method that reconstructs the binary adjacency matrix via tensor decomposition. We first reformulate the spatial-temporal fusion graph adjacency matrix into a threeway adjacency tensor. Then, we use Tucker decomposition to reconstruct the adjacency tensor, encoding more informative and global spatial-temporal dependencies. Finally, we propose multiple Spatial-temporal Tensor Graph Convolution layers that assemble a Spatial-temporal Synchronous Graph Convolutional module for localized spatial-temporal correlations learning and a Dilated Convolution module for global correlations learning in parallel. This enables the comprehensive spatial-temporal dependencies of the road network to be aggregated and learned. Experimental results on four open-access datasets demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in terms of prediction performances. Measurement of traffic flow stability and resilience is a critical step toward evaluating the performance of transportation systems and implementing appropriate management strategies. Quantifying changes in the stability and resilience of transportation systems, however, is hampered by the complexity of real traffic dynamics and the diversity of infrastructures. Here, we demonstrate that changes in traffic flow stability and resilience are signaled by generic features, known as early warning signals in the theory of critical slowing down, observed before traffic instabilities occur. This finding is incorporated in an operational data-driven algorithm to evaluate the risk of traffic jams on highways. Theoretical findings and tests on simulated and empirical case studies support the premise of this approach and identify candidate statistical measures that are sensitive to changes in the stability and resilience of transportation systems. Our use of universal measures advances the monitoring capability, prediction and control of complex transportation systems. Constructing the prediction intervals (PIs) for electric vehicle (EV) charging demand based on traffic flow information is crucial for the efficient operation of EV charging stations. However, due to the volatile nature of traffic flow, obtaining long-term traffic flow information (e.g., one week in advance) is challenging, particularly for multiple neighbored sites. To address this issue, this work establishes a deep learning prediction framework called Spatiotemporal Periodic Network (STPNet), which utilizes an encoder-decoder architecture. The STPNet incorporates a spatiotemporal and periodic pattern learning technique, and leverages the advantages of convolutional long short-term memory units (ConvLSTM) to quantify the uncertainty of traffic flow. Furthermore, to improve the performance of traffic flow prediction, a spatiotemporal series decomposition strategy based on Seasonal and Trend decomposition using Loess (STL) is employed, and a spatiotemporal PI performance-based loss function is creatively developed in this work. Then, the PIs of the EV charging demand are obtained based on the predicted traffic flow information and an M/M/C/K queuing model. Validated using a real-world dataset, the proposed model has been demonstrated to exhibit effectiveness in generating high-quality EV charging demand PIs for multiple locations. As city boundaries expand and the vehicles continues to proliferate, the transportation system is increasingly overloaded, greatly increasing people’s commuting burden and extending the resulting negative effects to all areas of work and life. It is a big issue that needs to be solved urgently. However, due to the development of infrastructure and technologies in 6G-driven Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), it becomes possible to alleviate urban congestion. Existing solutions either optimize the path planning of each vehicle, or only focus on solving the problem of resource allocation of a single road, neither can take advantage of self-organizing networks and easily fall into local optimum. Combining the above reasons, we propose the Direction Decide as a Service (DDaaS) scheme. First, it contains a novel three-layer service architecture based on Swarm Learning (SL), which enables orderly transmission of traffic data and control instructions and protects user privacy. Second, an improved local model and aggregation method is incorporated into DDaaS, which enables to make accurate predictions when the road resources at a single intersection are insufficient. Third, we propose a dynamic traffic control algorithm to provide signal light switching decisions for rapidly changing ITS. Finally, constructing an urban road simulation experiment combined with SUMO, we prove that DDaaS can reduce traffic congestion effectively and has significant advantages compared to other schemes. Traffic prediction is a very important mechanism in intelligent transportation systems for applications including routing planning and traffic control. In order to infer multifarious traffic information, one/two-relational traffic data in the vector/matrix form need to be expanded to multi-relational traffic data in an arbitrary tensor form. However, none of the existing approaches is capable of performing traffic prediction by characterizing and tracking the inherent nonlinear dynamics which are often encountered in realistic time-series analysis. Although the extended Kalman filter (EKF) has been proven to be quite promising in inferring nonlinear dynamics from time series, but the current EKF approach still suffers, unfortunately, from a serious drawback that state variables have to be represented in vector form. In fact, the characteristics of multi-relational states in practice can never been manifested accurately in practice and the performance of an EKF would be greatly restricted thereby. In this work, we introduce a new tensor extended Kalman filter (TEKF) approach to accommodate arbitrary input, output, and state variables all in arbitrary tensor forms. We also propose a new tensor-based expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate the nonlinear state-transition and observation-model mappings. The computational and memory complexities of the proposed TEKF approach are also studied in this paper. Finally, numerical experiments are conducted to evaluate the traffic prediction performance of the proposed new TEKF approach over the simulated and realworld traffic datasets in comparison with three other existing deep-learning prediction methods. The air traffic control paradigm is shifting from sector-based operations to flow-centric approaches to overcome sectors’ geographical limits. Modeling and predicting intersecting air traffic flows can assist controllers in flow coordination under the flow-centric paradigm. This paper proposes a flow-centric framework – TEMPT: Text-Enriched air traffic flow Modeling and Prediction using Transformers – to identify, represent, and predict intersecting flows in the airspace. Firstly, nominal flow intersections (NFI) are identified through hierarchical clustering of flight trajectory intersections. A flow pattern consistency-based graph analytics approach is proposed to determine the number of NFIs. Secondly, in contrast to the traditional traffic flow feature representation, i.e., numerical time series of flights, this paper proposes a text-enriched flow feature representation to intuitively describe the “flow of flights” in the airspace. More specifically, air traffic flow features are described by a “text paragraph” composed of the time and flight sequences transiting through the NFIs. Finally, a transformer neural network model is adopted to learn the text-enriched flow features and predict the future traffic demand at the NFIs during future time windows. An experimental study was carried out in French airspace to validate the efficacy of TEMPT using one-month ADS-B data in December 2019. Prediction results show that TEMPT outperforms the competitive air traffic flow modeling and prediction approaches: time-series-based Transformers, Long Short-term Memory (LSTM), and Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN), as well as aerodynamic trajectory simulation-based prediction and the historical average. Vehicle-to-infrastructure communications can inform an intersection controller about the location and speed of connected vehicles. Recently, the design of adaptive intersection control algorithms that utilize this information received substantial research attention. These studies typically assume perfect communications. This study explores the possible effects of a temporal decrease in the reliability of the communication channel, on the intersection throughput. Road traffic and DSRCVANET communications are modelled by integrating traffic and communication simulation tools (Vissim and OMNeT++, respectively). Simulations of scenarios with challenging, but realistic communication distortions conditions show significantly larger average delays to vehicles compared to scenarios with perfect communication conditions. These additional delays are largely independent of whether all or only some of the intersection approaches are affected by the communication distortions. Furthermore, delays do not increase uniformly on all signal groups. They may even decrease for some, which causes unfair allocation of green times. The control may be corrected for the lost communications using the information received in previous time intervals and simple assumptions about the vehicle movements. This correction decreases delays in all scenarios both for isolated and connected intersections. It performs similarly to the case with perfect communications when the communication distortions are distributed uniformly among all intersection approaches. Overall, the results demonstrate that the impact of the communication distortions should be considered in the design of the adaptive intersection control algorithms. Since the introduction of the Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD), many traffic control strategies and algorithms have been developed to implement MFD-based perimeter control over a specific urban region. A model-based controller consists of two components: a plant model that represents reality; and a prediction model used to determine optimal control actions. In most studies, the authors assume a constant average trip length for all drivers traveling within the same region, for the prediction model. In these studies about perimeter control and MFD traffic models, the controllers show a good performance because accumulations, i.e. traffic states, from the plant are used to reflect the initial state of the prediction model with a high frequency (about a few seconds). However, this average trip length changes over time as it depends on the Origin- Destination flow decomposition, playing an important role in real applications. The main contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we show that the assumption about constant trip lengths used in the prediction model deteriorates the controller’s performance for low frequency updates of the optimal control actions. Second, we propose a methodological framework based on the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) for dynamically adjusting the average trip lengths and accumulations. Our test results on a real city network show that applying this methodological framework significantly improves the controller’s performance. Recently, efforts have been made to standardize signal phase and timing (SPaT) messages. These messages contain signal phase timings of all signalized intersection approaches. This information can thus be used for efficient motion planning, resulting in more homogeneous traffic flows and uniform speed profiles. Despite efforts to provide robust predictions for semiactuated signal control systems, predicting signal phase timings for fully-actuated controls remains challenging. This paper proposes a time series prediction framework using aggregated traffic signal and loop detector data. We utilize state-of-the-art machine learning models to predict future signal phases’ duration. The performance of a Linear Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), a light gradient-boosting machine (LightGBM), a bidirectional Long-Short-Term-Memory neural network (BiLSTM) and a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCOV) are assessed against a naive baseline model. Results based on an empirical data set from a fully-actuated signal control system in Zurich, Switzerland, show that state of the art machine learning models outperform conventional prediction methods. With the development of modern Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), reliable and efficient transportation information sharing becomes more and more important. Although there are promising wireless communication schemes such as Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication standards, information sharing in ITS still faces challenges such as the V2X communication overload when a large number of vehicles suddenly appeared in one area. This flash crowd situation is mainly due to the uncertainty of traffic especially in the urban areas during traffic rush hours and will significantly increase the V2X communication latency. In order to solve such flash crowd issues, we propose a novel system that can accurately predict the traffic flow and density in the urban area that can be used to avoid the V2X communication flash crowd situation. By combining the existing grid-based and graph-based traffic flow prediction methods, we use a Topological Graph Convolutional Network (ToGCN) followed with a Sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) framework to predict future traffic flow and density with temporal correlations. The experimentation on a real-world taxi trajectory traffic data set is performed and the evaluation results prove the effectiveness of our method. Traffic congestion is a long-lasting worldwide problem and even becoming more severe in well-developed regions. Reversible lanes have been used worldwide on various road types to mitigate the effects of congestion and optimize mobility since the 1930s. However, with the limitation of traditional control and management methods, existing solutions can not meet the increasing travel demands. Therefore, the paper introduces a Predictive Empowered Assignment scheme for Reversible Lane (PEARL). By integrating the advanced traffic flow prediction module and bi-level optimization model, PEARL can be a more flexible dynamic lane assignment strategy with foresight compared to traditional lane management methods. In the prediction module, taking advantage of the development of machine learning technologies, the input of PEARL covers not only historical sequence and real-time data but also the environmental conditions in the region. The advanced Bi-directional Long Shortterm Memory (Abi-LSTM) model is employed for short-term traffic flow prediction. Then, the study introduces a bi-level optimization method to maximize the total throughput in both directions and minimize the total user costs which determine the lane deployment. The iterations on the prediction module and optimization module can help PEARL coordinate the future lane control plan and make the best decision. Finally, the paper builds up an experiment platform to simulate PEARL in a real-world scenario with heavy input flow for its performance evaluation. The accurate prediction of traffic conditions, including speed, flow, and travel time, poses a critical challenge in urbanization that significantly impacts car owners and road administrators. However, in certain scenarios with restricted road data availability (e.g. lack of traffic light status and signal control strategies, cooperation between road administrators and third parties, etc.), it is imperative to make effective use of basic road information (e.g. historical traffic data and road connectivity) to improve both prediction accuracy and scalability on various arterial road networks against state-of-art deep learning models. In this paper, we propose a spatial-temporal learning framework TPGraph for an accurate prediction of arterial roads’ traffic data by effectively utilizing upstream and downstream road information. TPGraph is composed of three major parts: 1) A multi-scale temporal feature fusion module that utilizes a multi-head attention mechanism to integrate recentlyperiodic features, daily-periodic features, and weekly-periodic features; 2) A multi-graph convolution module that employs graph fusion and graph convolution networks to capture richer spatial semantics, and 3) A dynamic spatial-temporal prediction module that leverages a spatial-temporal transformer for single or multiple traffic-state predictions. Our proposed framework, TPGraph, leverages just multi-scale historical traffic conditions and readily accessible spatial factors as input to generate accurate predictions of future traffic conditions. We mainly evaluate the performance of our approach through multi-step prediction experiments conducted at hourly intervals, forecasting travel time or travel speed for each road at 15 mins, 30 mins, and 1 hour. Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments on real-world arterial road datasets to demonstrate the superior predictive performance of TPGraph compared to existing methods. With the rapid progress of autonomous driving and advanced driver assistance systems, there are growing efforts to promote their safety in natural driving scenarios, especially for the detection of the traffic accidents. However, because of the dynamic camera motion and complex scene in driving situations, traffic accident detection is still challenging. In this work, we aim to give the ability of Traffic Accident Detection for driving systems by proposing a Self-Supervised Consistency learning framework, termed as SSC-TAD, that involves the appearance, motion, and context consistency learning. The key formulation is to find the inconsistency of video frames, object locations and the spatial relation structure of scene temporally between different frames captured by the dashcam videos. Within this field, different from the previous works which concentrate on predicting the future object locations or frames, we further focus on predicting the visual scene context in driving scenarios and detecting the traffic accident by considering the temporal frame consistency, temporal object location consistency, and the spatial-temporal relation consistency of road participants. In this work, this formulation is fulfilled by a collaborative multi-task consistency learning network and the visual scene context feature is represented by a graph convolution network. The superiority to the state-of-the-art is verified by exhaustive evaluations on two large scale datasets, i.e., the AnAn Accident Detection (A3D) dataset and DADA-2000 dataset collected recently. In Internet of Vehicles (IoV), accurate traffic flow prediction is helpful for analyzing road condition and then timely feedback traffic information to managers as well as travelers. Traditional traffic flow predictions are generally suffering from the performance degradation by over-fitting and manual intervening, which cannot support large-scale and high-dimensional urban road network data. To address this issue, in this paper, a traffic flow prediction framework for urban road network based on deep learning is proposed. Firstly, the feature engineering is introduced to extract the features from a large volume of traffic dataset, with the anomaly nodes eliminated. Next, the big traffic dataset is compressed through the spectral clustering compression scheme. Finally, we designed a hybrid traffic flow prediction scheme based on LSTM (Long Short Term Memory) and Sparse Auto-Encoder (SAE). Experimental results show that our proposed model is superior to other models with an average prediction accuracy approaching 97.7%. With the increase of private cars, traditional traffic signal control methods cannot alleviate the traffic congestion problem. Reinforcement learning (RL) is increasingly used in adaptive traffic light control. As urban traffic becomes more complex, reinforcement learning algorithms solely based on value or policy are not suitable for such scenarios. Moreover, the centralized method does not show a good effect on the multi-intersection, in particular, when the traffic flow is in the high-dimensional continuous state space. In this article, we propose a decentralized framework based on the advantage actor-critic (A2C) algorithm by assigning global control to each local RL agent or intersection. A2C algorithm involved in this article is a product of combining policy function and value function, which has good convergence ability and can be applied to continuous state space. The decentralized methods may put a new challenge: from the perspective of each local agent, the environment becomes partially observable. We overcome this problem by putting forward a region-aware cooperative strategy (RACS) based on graph attention network (GAT), which can incorporate the spatial information of the surrounding agents.We carry out experiments on synthetic traffic grid and real-world traffic network of Monaco city to compare with the existing A2C and Q-learning algorithms. Experimental results confirm that our RACS method has a shorter queue length and less waiting time than the two existing algorithms, and can reduce the total vehicle travel time. Recent spatial-temporal graph-based deep learning methods for Traffic Flow Prediction (TFP) problems have shown superior performance in modeling higher-level spatial interactions and temporal correlations. However, most of these methods suffer from post-fusion efficiency difficulty caused by separate explorations of the spatial communications and the temporal dependencies, which could result in delayed and biased predictions. To address that, we propose a Traffic Gated Graph Neural Networks (Traffic-GGNN) for real-time-fused spatial-temporal representation modeling. Firstly, we adopt bidirectional message passing to capture the location-wise spatial interactions. Secondly, we apply a GRU-based module to explore and aggregate the spatial interactions with the temporal correlations in a real-time fusion way. Lastly, we introduce a self-attention mechanism to reweight the location-based importance and produce the final prediction. Moreover, our proposed model allows end-to-end training thus it is easy to scale to diverse types of traffic datasets and yield better efficiency and effectiveness on three real-world datasets (SZ-taxi, Los-loop, and PEMS-BAY). Accurate prediction of travel time is an essential feature to support Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). The non-linearity of traffic states, however, makes this prediction a challenging task. Here we propose to use dynamic linear models (DLMs) to approximate the non-linear traffic states. Unlike a static linear regression model, the DLMs assume that their parameters are changing across time. We design a DLM with model parameters defined at each time unit to describe the spatio-temporal characteristics of time-series traffic data. Based on our DLM and its model parameters analytically trained using historical data, we suggest an optimal linear predictor in the minimum mean square error (MMSE) sense. We compare our prediction accuracy of travel time for freeways in California (I210-E and I5-S) under highly congested traffic conditions with those of other methods: the instantaneous travel time, k-nearest neighbor, support vector regression, and artificial neural network. We show significant improvements in the accuracy, especially for short-term prediction. Urban rail transit (URT) is vulnerable to natural disasters and social emergencies including fire, storm and epidemic (such as COVID-19), and real-time origin-destination (OD) flow prediction provides URT operators with important information to ensure the safety of URT system. However, hindered by the high dimensionality of OD flow and the lack of supportive information reflecting the real-time passenger flow changes, study in this area is at the beginning stage. A novel model consisting of two stages is proposed for OD flow prediction. The first stage predicts the inflows of all stations by Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) in real time, where the dimension is reduced compared with predicting OD flows directly. In the second stage, the notion of separation rate, namely, the proportion of inbound passengers bounding for another station, is estimated. Finally, The OD flow is predicted by multiplying the inflow and separation rate. Experiments based on Hangzhou Metro dataset show the proposed model outperforms the contrast model in weighted mean average error (WMAE) and weighted mean square error (WMSE). Results also suggest that the proposed prediction model performs better on weekdays than on weekends, and with greater accuracy on larger OD flows. In order to efficiently balance the current and future air traffic demands with the system capacity, a proper Air Traffic Flow Management (ATFM) approach is required. The current focus of ATFM is generally on optimally utilizing the available airspace and airport capacities, while maintaining the required safety separation between aircraft. Yet, only a minor focus is given to the inherent uncertainty in the Air Transportation System (ATS), especially to its adverse effect on safety and day-to-day operations. To this end, we propose an ATFM framework scrutinizing the stochastic nature of ATS through a chance-constraintbased probabilistic approach. Moreover, anticipating the high volumes in air traffic in the future, we propose to split the model into two stages, in which the first stage scrutinizes the behavior of a set of flights as a flow, while the second stage transforms them into individual flight plans, enhancing scalability. The two models are formulated as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) problem, and a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem at stages I and II, respectively. The NP-hard nature of the overall problem is minimized by transforming the problem into a Maximum Weighted Independent Set (MWIS) finding problem. Speed prediction is a crucial yet complicated task for intelligent transportation systems. The challenge derives from the complex spatiotemporal dependencies of traffic parameters. In the past few years, deep neural networks have achieved the best traffic speed prediction performance. However, most models depend on short-term input sequences to predict short/long-term traffic speed (e.g., predicting speed for the next hour using data from the past hour). These models fail to consider the daily and weekly periodic behavior of traffic. Another problem posed by neural networks is the lack of interpretability as they often operate as “black boxes”. In this paper, an attention-based multi-encoder-decoder (Att-MED) model is proposed to predict traffic speed. The model uses convolutional-LSTMs to capture the spatiotemporal relationship of multiple input sequences, namely short-term, daily and weekly traffic patterns. The model also employs an LSTM to model the output predictions sequentially. Furthermore, attention mechanism is used to weigh the contribution of each traffic sequence towards the output predictions. The proposed network architecture, when trained end-to-end, results in a superior prediction accuracy compared to baseline models. In addition to contributing towards performance, the attention mechanism creates weight values, which when visualized, provide insights into the decision-making process of the neural network, and consequently produce explainable outputs. Att-MED’s extracted attention weights highlight the contribution of daily and weekly periodic input towards speed prediction. This paper presents a novel optimization formulation to solve the problem of variable speed limit control on road networks modeled by the Lighthill-Whitham-Richards (LWR) partial differential equation. It also presents some mathematical rules that allow for a reduction in the size and computational time of the optimization problem. Using the analytical solutions to the LWR model, an optimization problem is formulated for the variable speed limit and ramp metering control of traffic on highway networks using the Lax-Hopf algorithm. The resulting problem, which is non-linear in the decision variables, is transformed into a Mixed Integer Linear Program. An example is presented to show the effectiveness of the approach, including its application to a real-world highway network with multiple ramp connections. The possibility of linear relaxation of integer variables in the problem is also considered. Lastly, the method is compared to a classical Link Transmission Model formulation of the variable speed limit control problem. This study proposes a vehicle platooning algorithm to minimize the disruption from a lane-changing maneuver. Towards achieving this objective, while most studies emphasize the interaction between the lane-changing vehicle and vehicles directly or indirectly impacted by the lane-changing maneuver (i.e., the followers of the lane-changing vehicle in the target lane after the lane-changing maneuver), this study will focus on the leaders of the lane-changing vehicle in the target lane. Assuming the connectivity between vehicles, we propose a novel approach to implement both Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) for platoon control. The proposed hybrid algorithm will create a forward-moving shockwave, resulting in an additional gap for the lane-changing vehicle. Simulation results indicate the ability of the proposed approach to generate an additional gap for the lane-changing vehicle and consequently, minimizing and potentially eliminating the disruption from the lane-changing maneuver. This paper studies the problem of coordinated rebalancing and charging scheduling for mobility-on-demand systems with electric vehicles. A joint framework consisting of multi-server M/M/s queueing and fluid model is proposed to solve the problem, in which the former is used to deal with charging scheduling of vehicles, while the latter describes the dynamics of vehicles and users in the system. A fluid policy is presented to minimize the total number of in-transit empty vehicles under static equilibrium, yielding the optimal assignment by nonlinear programming. To cope with dynamically varying traffic conditions, we further develop a two-stage realtime policy for charging and rebalancing scheduling, where rebalancing assignment is periodically adjusted and a timeweighted averaging method is proposed to predict the future travel demand. Also, the amount of vehicles to be deployed in each charging station is given to minimize the customer waiting time for charging. The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified via simulations and experiments.